























Weyerhaeuser Environmental Books

William Cronon, Editor

Weyerhaeuser Environmental Books explore human relationships with

natural environments in all their variety and complexity. They seek to cast

new light on the ways that natural systems affect human communities, the

ways that people affect the environments of which they are a part, and the

ways that different cultural conceptions of nature profoundly shape our

sense of the world around us. A complete listing of the books in the series

appears at the end of the book.





NATIVE 
SEATTLE

Histories from the Crossing-Over Place

COLL THRUSH

Foreword by William Cronon

U N I V E R S I T Y  O F  W A S H I N G T O N  P R E S S Seattle & London



Native Seattle is published with the assistance of a grant from the Weyerhaeuser 

Environmental Books Endowment, established by the Weyerhaeuser Company 

Foundation, members of the Weyerhaeuser family, and Janet and Jack Creighton.

© 2007 by the University of Washington Press

Printed in the United States of America

Design by Audrey Seretha Meyer

12 11 10 09 08 6 5 4 3

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or 

transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 

photocopy, recording, or any information storage or retrieval system, 

without permission in writing from the publisher.

University of Washington Press

P.O. Box 50096, Seattle, WA 98145

www.washington.edu/uwpress

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Thrush, Coll-Peter, 1970–

Native Seattle : histories from the crossing-over place / Coll Thrush.

p. cm.—(Weyerhaeuser environmental books)

Includes bibliographical references and index.

isbn: 978-0-295-98700-2 (cl. : alk. paper)

isbn: 978-0-295-98812-2 (pbk. : alk. paper)

1. Indians of North America—Washington (State)—Seattle—History.

2. Indians of North America—Washington (State)—Seattle—Antiquities.

3. Indians of North America—Washington (State)—Seattle—Social life and customs.

4. Seattle—(Wash.)—History. 5. Seattle (Wash.)—Antiquities.

6. Seattle (Wash.)—Social life and customs. I. Title.

e 78.w3t47 2007

979.7'77200497—dc22 2006034199

This book is printed on New Leaf Ecobook 50, which is 100 percent recycled, 

containing 50 percent post-consumer waste, and is processed chlorine free. 

Ecobook 50 is acid free and meets the minimum requirements of

ansi/niso z39~v48~w1992 (r 1997) (Permanence of Paper).


























CONTENTS

Foreword: Present Haunts of an Unvanished Past, 

by William Cronon vii

Preface xii

1 / The Haunted City 3

2 / Terra Miscognita 17

3 / Seattle Illahee 40

4 / Mr. Glover’s Imbricated City 66

5 / City of the Changers 79

6 / The Woven Coast 105

7 / The Changers, Changed 126

8 / On the Cusp of Past and Future 151

9 / Urban Renewal in Indian Territory 162

10 / The Returning Hosts 184

An Atlas of Indigenous Seattle, 

by Coll Thrush and Nile Thompson; 

maps by Amir Sheikh 209

Notes 257

Bibliography 293

Index 315




























FOREWORD

Present Haunts of an Unvanished Past

William Cronon

A
mong the oldest, most powerful, and most pernicious of

all ideas associated with the American frontier is the Myth of

the Vanishing Race. The story it tells is of settlers from across

the ocean or from far corners of the continent coming to

a new land and finding there an abundant Eden, rich in resources and

inhabited by native peoples enjoying nature’s bounty in harvests that

entailed little labor to improve the soil. Sometimes the myth portrays

these native inhabitants as savages who for no good reason seek to

destroy their new neighbors with unjustified acts of wanton violence.

Sometimes the myth presents Indians far more favorably, as a noble

race choosing to live lightly on the land, behaving with great honor and

generosity toward new arrivals whom they could easily have viewed as

invaders but whom instead they supported with gifts of food and other

necessities of life, only turning to violence after provocations so awful

that no reasonable person could expect anyone to endure them. But how-

ever the frontier myth portrays American Indians, whether negatively

or positively, it almost always ends in a transformed landscape in which

wilderness has given way to civilization, and, strikingly, native peoples

have vanished from the scene. Poignant though this narrative may some-

times seem, it has always been a cruel lie, distorting the actual lives and

histories of peoples who remain fully present in the transformed land-

scape despite the failure of historical narratives to notice their ongoing

presence in it.

Scholars and activists have been critiquing the Myth of the Vanish-

ing Race for decades, so by now its many distortions of American Indian

history should hardly come as a surprise. Yet it persists for many rea-

sons. Its oldest ideological purpose was undoubtedly to help forgive the

V I I



invaders their invasion—by implying that whatever the intentions on

either side, an “uncivilized” people could not survive their encounter

with the “civilized” people who would replace them. Sad though their

vanishing might be, no one was really to blame for it—or so the story

would have us believe. Subtler aspects of the myth reinforce this mes-

sage. By casting frontier settlement in heroic terms, with honorable men

and women on both sides coming into tragic conflict in the struggle to

build a new nation, Indians and settlers alike can be represented as

grander, nobler, larger than life. To the extent that the frontier has served

as a defining feature of American nationalism since the nineteenth cen-

tury, this heroic tale has proved to be an enduring resource for Amer-

ican national identity. Furthermore, the American devotion to romantic

nature that emerged simultaneously as part of the same nation-build-

ing process had the consequence of tying Indians to a wilderness land-

scape that came to symbolize an older, simpler, purer world that a fallen

humanity could now no longer inhabit. Strikingly, the movement to

set aside national parks and wilderness preserves was nearly simulta-

neous with the movement of Indian tribes onto reservations, so that

human inhabitants were made to vanish from the American wilder-

ness as a self-fulfilling prophecy of its unpeopled nature.

Y
et there is a less-noticed aspect of the Myth of the

Vanishing Race that is arguably just as problematic. Perhaps  

in part because Indian peoples have long been associated with

“nature,” it has been remarkably easy not to notice their pres-

ence in places that are marked as “unnatural” in American under-

standings of landscape. Chief among these are urban and metropolitan

areas, which for more than a century have provided homes for people

of American Indian descent to a much greater degree than most

people realize. Although there is a widespread assumption that most

Indians live on reservations, in fact, many more live outside the bound-

aries of those legal homelands, with a substantial fraction living in cities.

In the U.S. Census for the year 2000, for instance, New York City was

home to 106,444 full or mixed-blood American Indians, Alaskan

Natives, and Native Hawaiians, compared with 66,236 in Los Angeles,

V I I I



25,513 in Chicago, and comparably large numbers in most other cities.1

To the extent that actual Indians did indeed “vanish” from various parts

of the continent, it wasn’t because they had ceased to exist; they had

simply migrated elsewhere—often, like so many other Americans, to

urban areas. Perhaps most strangely of all, when native peoples occu-

pied sites where the forces of urbanization were greatest, they found

themselves becoming invisible—not to themselves, of course, but to

their new neighbors—in the very places that had always been their

homes.

It is this ironic story—almost never told by scholars precisely

because the Myth of the Vanishing Race has been so pervasive—that

Coll Thrush brilliantly narrates in his remarkable and beautifully writ-

ten book, Native Seattle: Histories from the Crossing-Over Place. Begin-

ning with the observation that few cities in the United States have placed

greater emphasis on their native heritage than Seattle, he then points

to the subtle and tragic processes that gradually marginalized and

obscured Indian people residing in that city. Even as totem poles and

Northwest Coast Indian artworks were coming to symbolize Seattle’s

special regional identity, native inhabitants were being assigned their

traditional roles in the narrative of the vanishing race: as poignant icons

of a lost past, as images of timeless beauty, but not as living residents.

In a city where so many streets and sites bear Indian names and where,

as Thrush wryly notes, totem poles until only recently outnumbered

cell phone towers, it has been all too easy for non-Indian inhabitants

and visitors to miss the fact that thousands of native people still live

within the boundaries of the city.

One strand of Thrush’s narrative, then, is a series of ghost stories:

tales of how Seattle became a city haunted with evocative images of its

native past. Among its many Indian ghosts, none has played a more

prominent role than Chief Seattle himself, or Seeathl as this book prefers

to call him as a reminder of his actual historical identity. Chief Seattle

F O R E W O R D  /  I X

1. Mark Fogarty, “Stats say Big Apple has most urban Indians,” Indian Country

Today, February 25, 2003; on-line at http://www.indiancountry.com/content.cfm?id=

1046182689.



is associated with what is arguably the single most famous piece of

Indian oratory in all of American history, a text that most Americans

have encountered many times without giving much thought to its ori-

gins or authenticity, both of which are murky at best. Its closing lines

explicitly describe cities like Seattle as places still perennially visited by

the shades of departed peoples who still hold them dear:

At night when the streets of your cities and villages will be silent and you think

them deserted, they will throng with returning hosts that once filled and still

love this beautiful land. The white man will never be alone. Let him be just

and deal kindly with my people, for the dead are not powerless. Dead—did 

I say? There is no death, only a change of worlds.

It is hard not to be moved by the poetry of these lines (see pp. 5–6), which

no doubt accounts for the frequency with which they are quoted—and

yet it would also be hard to imagine a passage that more unambiguously

affirms the Myth of the Vanishing Race. That is why it is so unsurpris-

ing to learn that we have no real authority for believing that Chief Seat-

tle actually spoke these words, or that he so easily imagined a future time

when his still-living people had ceased to dwell in their homeland.

This, then, leads to the second major theme of Coll Thrush’s book.

Tacking back and forth between myth and reality, he painstakingly

demonstrates the ongoing presence of Duwamish, Suquamish, and

other native residents of Seattle who have always been present, always

part of its history, even as the myth was doing its work of reinventing

a supposedly vanished Indian landscape to fit the frontier and regional

narrative of the emerging city on the shore of Puget Sound. In so doing,

he effectively turns the myth on its head by showing how intimately

Seattle’s native residents were involved in every stage of the city’s his-

torical evolution. Far from vanishing, they were present at the creation,

they continued to make essential contributions as the city grew to met-

ropolitan status, and they persisted in maintaining their special rela-

tionships with the local landscape right down to the present. Over and

over again, Thrush discovers a geography of native use and native

dwelling that the modern cityscape obscures without quite eliminat-

X



ing altogether. Some places in this intricate web of native relationships

with the local environment eventually came to be highlighted in the

imagined geography of modern Seattle, while others found no place in

that geography. Among its many accomplishments, Native Seattle

offers quiet but irresistible proof that any full understanding of the city’s

history must incorporate all aspects of native history and geography,

not just the ones selectively celebrated by the Myth of the Vanishing

Race.

The result is a history with implications far beyond Seattle. No other

book does what this one does. In a world where many modern people

too easily lose track of the natural ecosystems they inhabit, preferring

instead to seek out “nature” in remote corners of the globe, it is useful

to be reminded that even a great city has a long history of human habi-

tation that is intimately and inextricably bound to the local lands and

waters and creatures that help define such places. By seeking out the

myriad ways that Seattle’s native peoples related to the world around

them, Thrush offers modern city dwellers an unexpectedly powerful

way of seeing aspects of the urban landscape that might otherwise be

entirely invisible to them. And by showing readers how human beings

in the past have related to the local ecosystems even of great metro-

politan areas in profoundly different ways, he reminds us not to be taken

in by the seductive but all-too-selective appeals of our mythic imagi-

nations. Just as Seattle’s native peoples have never vanished from the

city, neither have the geographies—natural and historical and imagined—

that made those people native to this place. By helping us see the mod-

ern city at least a little through the eyes of people whose presence might

otherwise be too easy to ignore, Coll Thrush invites us to revisit the his-

tories and geographies of our own home places as well.

F O R E W O R D  /  X I




























PREFACE

O
nce upon a time—meaning in the early phases of grad-

uate school—I had the idea that I was going to have to write

about everything that ever happened to every Indian per-

son in Seattle, but I soon realized that this was neither pos-

sible nor would it make a book anyone wanted to read. The stories

included in this book, then, are intended simply as examples of the kinds

of experiences Native people have had in the city and its hinterland and,

just as important, how those experiences have intersected with larger

questions about urban development and urbanity itself. As with the

Duwamish and their struggle for recognition, I hope that this book will

create new opportunities for Indian people in Seattle to speak about

their lives and be heard, even if the stories they tell differ markedly from,

or even contradict, the broader urban narrative I have written.

And the narrative is indeed intended to be a broad one, stretching

from before the landing of the “Denny Party” at Alki Beach in 1851 to

the beginning of the twenty-first century. Chapter 1 sets the stage by

examining the current state of Seattle’s “place-story,” which is domi-

nated by metaphorical Indians and the notion—promulgated both by

scholarly literature and by popular culture—that urban and Native his-

tories are somehow mutually exclusive. The narrative then continues

with two chronological chapters. Chapter 2 retells the founding of Seat-

tle as a complex historical process, a longue durée rather than a snap-

shot singularity, which took place within a dynamic landscape whose

indigenous inhabitants shaped the founding process in important

ways. Chapter 3 examines the even greater role that indigenous people

such as the Duwamish played in the creation of an urban frontier on

Puget Sound. Throughout Seattle’s “village period,” the 1850s through

X I I I



the 1870s, the Duwamish and other Indian people literally made Seat-

tle possible through their labor and their participation in town life, even

as they were scapegoated as symbols of urban disorder.

Chapter 4 is the first of two “hinges” in the narrative, both focusing

closely on Seattle’s Indian landscapes during narrowly defined but crit-

ically important periods of change in Seattle’s urban Native histories.

The first hinge, in the 1880s, uses the federal census and other fine-

grained sources to show a nascent city in which multiple kinds of Indian

history—of local indigenous people, Native migrants to the city, and

Indian images in the “urban vocabulary”—began to intersect in com-

plicated ways. The second hinge, Chapter 8, focuses on the 1930s, when

these three histories had matured into dominant facets of Seattle’s urban

story and when the city stood poised for the transformative experience

of the Second World War.

Chapters 5–7, instead of proceeding chronologically, each look at

one of these three Native histories in the period between the two “hinges”

of the 1880s and the 1930s. Chapter 5 examines the experiences of local

indigenous people through Seattle’s massive environmental transfor-

mations and their near-total dispossession from the urban landscape

through the seemingly self-fulfilling prophecy of the “vanishing race.”

Chapter 6 is about the creation of a vast Native hinterland woven together

by the movement of Indian people and things to and from Seattle and

places along the broader Northwest Coast. Non-Indians’ use of Indian

imagery to tell (and sell) Seattle’s story, and contention over what exactly

that story was, are the subjects of Chapter 7.

After the second “hinge” of Chapter 8, the final two chapters exam-

ine the postwar period through two related but distinct stories. Chap-

ter 9 is about the multiethnic, pan-Indian urban community that took

shape in the postwar years, while Chapter 10 is about the resurgence of

local tribes such as the Duwamish in the arena of civic discourse. Both

chapters illustrate the ongoing legacies of earlier periods in Seattle’s

Native pasts, the ways in which Indian people have claimed space and

authority within the city, and how these legacies and claimings con-

tinue to interact with Seattle’s Native symbolism and urban storyline.

The idea that Indians and cities are mutually exclusive—or, more

X I V



to the point, that Native people do not “belong” in urban places—is, in

addition to being an outgrowth of broader American ideas about prog-

ress, also a result of the simple fact that Indian people can be very hard

to find in cities. Collecting the histories included in this book was at

times like looking for a handful of needles in an even greater number

of haystacks. I always operated, however, under the axiom that “absence

of evidence is not necessarily evidence of absence,” and so made few

assumptions about what kinds of sources might include references to

Native people. I used the sources typical of any ethnohistorical project

such as anthropologists’ field notes, oral tradition, Indian agents’ reports,

and archaeological studies. I also mined standard sources of urban social

and cultural history—memoirs, newspapers, locally produced neighbor-

hood studies, federal censuses, and subscription histories—for any men-

tion of Native people. In many cases, these sources had to be analyzed

on two levels: I used them both to establish the presence of Native people

and to assess non-Indian attitudes about the presence of Native people

in the city. Lastly, I spent a great deal of time examining urban sources

such as engineers’ reports that made no mention of Indians at all. It

was here that absences turned into evidence: by triangulating between

these sources, Native sources such as oral tradition or indigenous top-

ographical names and sources speaking to the environmental conse-

quences of urban transformation, I was able to link both engineers and

elders—and thus urban and Indian histories—through close attention

to place and environmental change. The highly interdisciplinary, even

omnivorous, methodologies of environmental history were thus criti-

cal to unearthing Seattle’s Native pasts.

Unearthing those pasts also involved resurrecting the racism of the

past. While looking for non-Indian narratives about Indian people in

the city, I all too often encountered words and phrases that have been

used to demean, marginalize, and even kill Native men and, especially,

women. Some people fear that repeating such racist language perpet-

uates racism. I am of the belief, however, that the only way that we can

talk critically about racism is to understand—and see clearly—the lan-

guage that reinforced it. Let me say here that I understand (as much

as any gay white man truly can) the pain associated with terrible words

P R E F A C E  /  X V



such as “squaw,” “Siwash,” or “savage” and with the mischaracteriza-

tion of Native women as prostitutes. I hope that the reader will under-

stand that my use, for example, of quotations containing these words

and ideas was done with the goal of laying bare the ignorance and racism

of the past. I also hope that this book will contribute to the ongoing

struggle against the ignorance and racism of the present, which, if often

masked, run surprisingly deep.

Writing Native histories in English is by definition an imprecise art.

Scholars and tribal people have come up with many ways, for example,

to write down Whulshootseed words. (Even the name itself is up for

debate. Some call it Puget Sound Salish, while others call it Lushoot-

seed; Whulshootseed is the southern, Seattle-area dialect version of the

name.) With nonspecialist readers in mind, in the main text of this book

I have used indigenous names for local places only in English transla-

tion. Readers interested in more detailed information on these places,

including the Whulshootseed versions of their names, should visit the

atlas at the back of the book. There, the Whulshootseed names are spelled

using a practical orthography developed by atlas coauthor Nile Thomp-

son. Within the main text, I have chosen to spell individual Native

people’s Indian names—Whulshootseed or otherwise—using English

approximations. At times, these spellings differ from those in most his-

torical sources. For example, the man after whom Seattle is named is

referred to in this book as Seeathl rather than as Seattle—or Sealth,

another common anglicization of his name—both to distinguish the

individual from the city (and the Chief Seattle Speech attributed to him)

and to suggest a pronunciation as close as possible to the Whulshoot-

seed original. (It should be pronounced something like “see-ahthl,” with

the break between syllables like the break in “uh-oh” and the final sound

like the Welsh “ll.”) I hope that any loss of linguistic integrity will be

compensated for by greater readability.

W
ithout a doubt, the most important collaborators

in a project like this are Native people themselves. There

is no longer any reason (or excuse) for a scholar to write

Indian history without the active participation of tribal

X V I



people. The Muckleshoot Indian Tribe in my hometown of Auburn,

Washington, granted me access to oral histories dealing with Seattle

and supported my interest in publishing the material included in this

book’s atlas. I especially want to thank the members of the tribe’s Cul-

ture Committee, tribal staff members, and archaeologist Lynn Larson,

who suggested that I talk to the Muckleshoot in the first place. With-

out the accounts of Ollie Wilbur, Art Williams, and other Muckleshoot

community members, this would have been a very different, and much

less interesting, book.

The Duwamish Tribe of Seattle, on the other hand, chose to partic-

ipate only indirectly in this project. I am grateful for the suggestions

they did make and have done my best to incorporate them and to include

Duwamish voices past and present, garnered from archival and press

sources, wherever possible. Based on what I know of the tribe’s archives

and oral tradition through conversations with other researchers, I am

not convinced that the overall shape of this book would have been rad-

ically different had the Duwamish participated more directly. It might

have included some additional specific information on the mixed-race

families of “Seattle Illahee,” a few more details about the 1916–25

“break” in Duwamish leadership, and a clearer picture of what Duwa-

mish community members were doing between that alleged break and

their new visibility beginning in the 1970s. But my portrayal of the roles

that their ancestors played in early Seattle history and the part present-

day tribal members have played in reshaping the city’s narrative would

likely change little. My hope is that this book will spark even greater

public interest in the Duwamish and their stories, and I wish them the

best in their continued search for federal recognition and in their efforts

to build a longhouse on the river that bears their name.

Because this book is not only about the indigenous peoples of Seat-

tle and their descendants, it was important to gain insights from within

the multiethnic, pan-tribal, urban Indian community in the city. I espe-

cially want to thank Teresa BrownWolf Powers, and indirectly the Amer-

ican Indian Women’s Service League, for granting me access to hours

of unedited interviews Teresa taped with Service League members. As

with the tribal oral histories, these interviews filled what would have

P R E F A C E  /  X V I I



otherwise been silence. Sandy Osawa, Roger Fernandes, and Jeanette

Bushnell also helped me think about present-day urban Native issues,

and my interview with former “Skid Road queen” Bill Regan provided

a window into a community that left virtually no records behind. If noth-

ing else, these people proved just how diverse and complex Seattle’s

urban Indian community is.

There is also a person whose life and history sit at the crossroads of

almost all of Seattle’s various Indian histories and who deserves special

praise for her generosity and insightfulness. Although a member of the

Muckleshoot Tribe, where she also works as a grant administrator, Jackie

Swanson is also the great-granddaughter of Chesheeahud, a Duwa-

mish man who figures prominently in Seattle’s early history. She was

also deeply involved in the American Indian Women’s Service League in

the 1970s and, through that experience, knew intimately the now-largely-

disappeared world of Indian Skid Road. Whether sharing her own writ-

ings about the history and significance of the Service League, inviting

me to examine old photos of powwows and other events, or showing me

the baskets made by Chesheeahud’s daughter Julia Siddle (her grand-

mother), Jackie helped me see just how closely interwoven these histo-

ries are and offered insights in a truly compassionate, helpful way.

Several remarkable scholars have been generous guides along the

way to this book. John Findlay took great interest in my personal and

professional development, reeled me in during some of my more exces-

sive flights of fancy, and helped me understand what the word “edit”

really means. Richard White quietly encouraged me to say what I mean

and do it clearly, and his willingness to continue advising this project

after his departure from the University of Washington to Stanford Uni-

versity speaks volumes about his commitment to students. Gail Dubrow

reminded me to connect the work to the concerns of real people and

supported my interests in public history. If Sasha Harmon was an

invaluable resource for her expertise in local Indian affairs, then she

has also proved an excellent trimmer of awkward prose. Suzanne Leb-

sock and Jim Gregory, both members of my PhD committee, provided

important insights as well despite the fact that urban Indian histories

are far removed from their own areas of interest.

X V I I I



The support of my fellow graduate students improved this work nearly

as much as the advice I received from my faculty. I began graduate school

with a cohort of Americanists whose names will no doubt become well

known within the discipline in years to come: Jen Seltz, Roberta Gold,

Andrea Geiger, Michael Witgen, Connie Chiang, Jeff Brune, and Liz

Escobedo. The hours that I—the “local guy”—spent with them in read-

ings courses and research seminars kept me from being provincial.

Ray Rast joined us later and was a kindred spirit thanks to his inter-

ests in place, landscape, and memory. I also received encouragement

and criticism—as well as lessons on writing for audiences who do not

spend their days thinking about Native issues—from Susan Smith, Ali

Igmen, Michael Reese, David Biggs, and Joe Roza, among others. Ned

Blackhawk, Pam Creasy, and Pauline Escudero Shafer kept me honest

as a white guy doing Indian history. When my own writing bogged down,

I often turned to Kate Brown’s beautiful study of the Ukrainian border-

lands for inspiration. Matt Klingle, however, deserves more credit than

any other graduate colleague. While writing his “companion volume”—

an environmental history of Seattle—Matt was both big brother and

research assistant, offering personal and professional guidance while

also keeping an eye out for Native people in the archives. I look forward

to seeing his book next to this one on the shelf. 

Lisa Scharnhorst, Sandra Kroupa, Carla Rickerson, Gary Lundell, 

and the other staff of the University of Washington Special Collections

deserve praise for their tolerance, interest in my research, and deep

knowledge of the trove they guard. Beyond the University of Washington,

many other people made this book possible. John Lutz, of the Univer-

sity of Victoria, helped me flesh out the British Columbia side of things,

while Paige Raibmon, now a colleague at the University of British

Columbia, offered important insights arising from the intersections

between our two projects. Carolyn Marr and Howard Giske guided me

through the Museum of History and Industry’s collections, while Greg

Lange and the staff of the Puget Sound Branch of the Washington State

Archives in Bellevue suggested sources I never would have thought to

examine. Miriam Waite and the Daughters of the Pioneers honored me

both with a small scholarship and with an afternoon among the descen-

P R E F A C E  /  X I X



dants of people who appear herein. Local historian David Buerge

deserves credit for writing a series of Seattle Weekly articles that inspired

my interest in Seattle’s indigenous history in the first place. Peripatetic

anthropologist Jay Miller helped with insights into local oral tradition

and language. And with one eye on the local details and the other on

the broader scholarship, Lorraine McConaghy was a compatriot in civic

iconoclasm and a counselor in times of academic insecurity. Her pas-

sion and rigor helped to make this a better book and me a better scholar.

Local historical and ecological activists such as David Williams, Valerie

Rose, Tom Dailey, Monica Wooton, Paul Talbert, Georgina Kerr, and

others proved to me that there was an audience for this history. To some

degree, this book was written for people like them. I hope it inspires

them to continue their efforts to engage the places where they live and

the histories to which they are party.

As editor of the Weyerhaeuser Environmental Series, of which this

book is the first Indian-centered volume, Bill Cronon encouraged me

to rethink whether this book belonged in the series and provided noth-

ing but enthusiasm along the way. Julidta Tarver, meanwhile, kept me

on track for publication, showed great warmth during some trying

times, and paid me a great deal of attention despite the fact that she is

semiretired from the University of Washington Press. Two anonymous

reviewers also provided critically important feedback on the manuscript,

seeing things I no longer could after all the years of living with this

project. Pam Bruton deserves credit for the thankless task of copyedit-

ing, and Marilyn Trueblood oversaw the production of the book at the

Press.

Two collaborators deserve their own paragraph. Nile Thompson, a

gifted linguist with an eye for detail (to say the least), has made an irre-

placeable contribution through his work on the “Atlas of Indigenous

Seattle” at the end of this book. I dread to think what might have ended

up in print without his expertise in Salish linguistic structure and world-

view, his working knowledge of Whulshootseed, and his attention to

fine nuances of logic and evidence. Now I truly understand why lin-

guistics is its own discipline, and why historians should keep to their

own turf. Amir Sheikh, who designed the maps for the atlas, was both

X X



a stalwart friend and an intellectual co-conspirator. As he pursues grad-

uate studies of his own, I only hope I can contribute as much to Amir’s

future scholarship as he has already contributed to mine.

Finally, this book is dedicated to three people who have shaped my

life in profound ways. First, Robert H. Keller Jr., the resident historian

at Western Washington University’s Fairhaven College, saved me from

law school and showed me that all the things I cared about in fact counted

as history. It is difficult to imagine having been anything other than a

historian, and I have Bob to thank for that. Second, my husband, Simon

Martin, has been my therapist, keel, and accountant through the neu-

roses and vagaries of graduate school and the academic life. Over the

past dozen years, he has sacrificed a great deal in my pursuit of a career,

but I think he would agree that it’s been worth it. Lastly, this book is

dedicated to my mother, Paula Thrush, who died of cancer in Febru-

ary 2005 and thus never had the chance to see this published or even

to know that I’d been offered a position at the University of British

Columbia. She made me who I am through her utter inability to sit

still and do nothing, through her passion for place and the environment,

and through her unswerving (if not always uncritical) support of her

only child. I wish I could talk to her again.

P R E F A C E  /  X X I





NATIVE SEATTLE




























1 / The Haunted City

E
very american city is built on Indian land, but few adver-

tise it like Seattle. Go walking in the city, and you will see Native

American images everywhere in the urban landscape. Wolf and

Wild Man stalk the public spaces of downtown in the form of

totem poles. Tlingit Orca totems adorn manhole covers, and a bronze

Indian chieftain raises a welcoming hand as the monorail hums past.

Street musicians, protestors, and holiday shoppers move across a plaza

paved with bricks laid in the pattern of a cedar-bark basket. Souvenir

shops hawk dreamcatchers and sweatshirts with totemic Frogs, while

only doors down, a high-end gallery sells argillite totem poles, soap-

stone walruses, and Earthquake spirit masks carved by modern mas-

ters. Massive car ferries with names like Klickitat and Elwha slide across

Puget Sound, passing an island where, since the 1962 world’s fair, Kwak-

waka’wakw performers have welcomed visitors and world leaders to a

North Coast–style longhouse. Out in the neighborhoods, schoolchild-

ren have adorned bus shelters with Haida designs of the Salmon spirit,

and Coast Salish spindle whorls have been soldered into a sewage treat-

ment station’s security gates. And then there are the names on the land

itself: one park named for a red paint used in traditional ceremonies

and another for an ancient prairie; a marina called Shilshole and an

industrial waterway known as Duwamish; the lakefront enclave of

Leschi, named for an executed indigenous leader. Seattle, it seems, is

a city in love with its Native American heritage.1

Indeed, it is the totem poles, motifs of the Salmon spirit, and fer-

ries with Indian names that tell you where you are: without them, Seat-

tle would somehow be less Seattle. Every carved image, every statue of

3



an Indian, every indigenous name on the land implies that you are here

in this place and not in another. They are part of how you know you

are not in New York or New Orleans, London or Los Angeles. They are

what we expect from Seattle. They are stories about place. 

Iconic western writer William Kittredge has described how stories

and places are connected: 

Places come to exist in our imaginations because of stories, and so do we.

When we reach for a “sense of place,” we posit an intimate relationship to 

a set of stories connected to a particular location, such as Hong Kong or the

Grand Canyon or the bed where we were born, thinking of histories and the

evolution of personalities in a local context. Having “a sense of self ” means

possessing a set of stories about who we are and with whom and why.

In Seattle, visitors and residents alike tell and are told stories about this

city: that it is built on Indian land, that that land was taken to build a

great metropolis, and that such a taking is commemorated by the city’s

Native American imagery. These stories in and of place, these place-

stories, define Seattle as a city with an indigenous pedigree.2

But Seattle is also a haunted city. In a metropolis built in indigenous

territory, and where cellular phone towers only recently outnumbered

totem poles, it comes as no surprise that Seattle has Indian ghosts. There

is the tale of Joshua Winfield, a settler who built his home on an Indian

cemetery near Lake Washington, only to be frightened into eternity by

indigenous revenants one night in 1874. The spectral pleas of another

Indian ghost, allegedly that of a murdered Native prostitute, have been

heard since the Prohibition era in a rambling Victorian home near

the Duwamish. At a nearby golf course, a naked Indian described as

a shaman has been seen since the 1960s, dancing at night on what is

rumored to be another indigenous burial ground. And at Pike Place

Market, the apparition of an Indian woman in a shawl and floor-length

skirt has appeared for generations in the windows of the magic shop

and in the aisles of the bead store. Meanwhile, members of the local

tribes pray for the dead on the banks of the industrial river named for

their people, and Native storytellers lead purification ceremonies in the

4



underground streets and storefronts beneath Pioneer Square, in hopes

of bringing peace to wandering indigenous specters.3

By far, though, the most famous haunting of Seattle is accomplished

by the city’s namesake, a man called Seeathl. A local indigenous leader

of Duwamish and Suquamish heritage who facilitated the city’s found-

ing, Seeathl is best known for words he is said to have spoken during

treaty discussions in the 1850s, when Seattle’s urban promise seemed

to require the dispossession of local Native peoples:

Your religion was written on tablets of stone by the iron finger of an angry

God lest you forget. The red man could never comprehend nor remember 

it. Our religion is the tradition of our ancestors, the dreams of our old men,

given to them in the solemn hours of the night by the Great Spirit, and the

visions of our leaders, and it is written in the hearts of our people. 

Your dead cease to love you and the land of their nativity as soon as they

pass the portals of their tomb; they wander far away beyond the stars and 

are soon forgotten and never return. Our dead never forget this beautiful

world that gave them being. They always love its winding rivers, its sacred

mountains, and its sequestered vales, and they ever yearn in the tenderest

affection over the lonely-hearted living and often return to visit, guide, and

comfort them. 

We will ponder your proposition, and when we decide, we will tell you. But

should we accept it, I here and now make this the first condition, that we will

not be denied the privilege, without molestation, of visiting at will the graves

where we have buried our ancestors, and our friends, and our children. 

Every part of this country is sacred to my people. Every hillside, every val-

ley, every plain and grove has been hallowed by some fond memory or some

sad experience of my tribe. Even the rocks, which seem to lie dumb as they

swelter in the sun along the silent seashore in solemn grandeur, thrill with

memories of past events connected with the lives of my people. 

And when the last red man shall have perished from the earth and his

memory among the white men shall have become a myth, these shores will

swarm with the invisible dead of my tribe; and when your children’s children

shall think themselves alone in the fields, the store, the shop, upon the high-

way, or in the silence of the pathless woods, they will not be alone. In all the

earth there is no place dedicated to solitude. 

At night when the streets of your cities and villages will be silent and you

T H E  H A U N T E D  C I T Y  /  5



think them deserted, they will throng with returning hosts that once filled and

still love this beautiful land. The white man will never be alone. Let him be

just and deal kindly with my people, for the dead are not powerless. Dead—

did I say? There is no death, only a change of worlds.

According to Seattle Times writer Eric Scigliano, the Chief Seattle

Speech, as it has come to be known, is a “ghost story like no other.” It

represents not just the words of one man but also “the innumerable

souls who fished and sang and made art along these shores and had

no inkling of cities.” Seeathl gave voice to those “wraiths,” and the city’s

modern residents, Scigliano warns, should “tread lightly and treat the

land softly. You never know who might be watching—from above, or

even nearer.”4

But like any good haunting, the authenticity of the speech cannot be

proven. It first appeared in print more than three decades after Seeathl

put his mark on the Treaty of Point Elliott, and it bears a suspicious resem-

blance to Victorian prose lamenting the passing of the “red man.” There

is no question that Seeathl spoke eloquently at the treaty proceedings—

he carried Thunder, which gave skills of oratory, as one of his many

spirit powers—but his exact words are lost. What we do know, how-

ever, is that the speech has become a key text of both indigenous rights

and environmentalist thinking, with some of its adherents going so far

as to call it a “fifth Gospel.” Simultaneously urtext and Rorschach test,

the words of Seeathl haunt Seattle, telling stories of Native nobility,

American colonialism, and longing for a lost environmental paradise.

Somewhere between fiction and fact, these place-stories haunt any his-

tory of Seattle. But they often have little to do with the more compli-

cated story of the real Seeathl, who died in 1866 on a reservation across

Puget Sound from Seattle and was buried in a grave bearing his new

Catholic name: Noah. Instead, these ghost stories of Seeathl have far

more to do with the people telling them.5

This is the power of ghost stories, of phantoms at the Market, and

the sage wisdom of dead chiefs: they tell us more about ourselves, and

about our time, than they tell us about other people or the past. In writ-

ing of the role of ghosts in medieval European society, historian Jean-

6



Claude Schmitt has claimed that “the dead have no existence other than

that which the living imagine for them,” and recent scholarship on Amer-

ican ghosts has shown that hauntings are among the most telling of

cultural phenomena, expressing powerful anxieties, desires, and regrets.

As Judith Richardson has illustrated in her work on ghosts in New York’s

Hudson Valley, hauntings are in fact social memories inspired by rapid

cultural and environmental change, arising not so much from molder-

ing graves as from the struggle to create a meaningful history. Ghosts

are also rooted in places, perhaps none more so than the ghosts of Indi-

ans. In her analysis of hauntings in American literature, Renée Berg-

land has argued that stories of Indian ghosts are also place-stories about

what happened in particular places and what those happenings meant.

“Europeans take possession of Native American lands, to be sure,” Berg-

land writes, “but at the same time, Native Americans take supernatu-

ral possession of their dispossessors.” Thence springs the resonance

of the Chief Seattle Speech, which is not easily separated from the wind-

ing rivers and sequestered vales it mourns. It is a story about a place

as much as it is a story about a people, and it is a story about us in the

present as much as it is about historical actors.6

There is also an intimacy to Seattle’s ghost stories. Among the indige-

nous people of Puget Sound, the phantasms most feared were those of

the recent dead and of kin; these sorts of ghosts vexed the living and

put them in great danger, particularly in the rainy winter months. The

ghosts of strangers were far less dangerous. The greater its entangle-

ment with the living, it was thought, the greater a phantom’s power.

And so it is in Seattle’s ghostly history: the closer we have lived to each

other, the more we have been haunted.

At the same time, the problem inherent in Seattle’s Indian ghost

stories—indeed the central problem of Seattle’s Native American

history—is that none of these imagined Indians was ever real. While

there may be some kernel of historical truth to some of them, for the

most part they are historical creations, both because they spring out of

the city’s past and because they are ways to make sense of that past.

The danger in this, however, is that they all too often tell us exactly what

we expected to hear. The restless Indian dead confirm the city’s story-

T H E  H A U N T E D  C I T Y  /  7



line, which is this: Native history and urban history—and, indeed, Indi-

ans and cities—cannot coexist, and one must necessarily be eclipsed

by the other. The standard story told about Seeathl and the city named

for him is perhaps the best example of this narrative; take, for exam-

ple, New York Times correspondent Tim Egan’s version. In his best-

selling meditation on Pacific Northwest history and landscape, The Good

Rain, Egan writes of kayaking on Elliott Bay and pondering the con-

nections between Seeathl and Seattle. Looking back and forth between

the modern urban skyline and the site of the indigenous leader’s grave

across Puget Sound, Egan summarizes the story of the man and the

city: “He lived to be a very old man, going from aboriginal king of Elliott

Bay and the river that drained into it, to a withered curiosity on the muddy

streets of what would become the largest city in the country named after

a Native American.” To understand Seeathl and Seattle, it seems that

this is all you need to know, and it tells us what we knew all along: that

the Native past must give way to the urban future. The place-story of

Chief Seattle is about the change from one world to another, with Native

history surviving only as a prophetic shadow, a disturbing memory, an

instructive haunting.7

This is not to say that Indian people do not exist in the urban present.

Of course they do—in the thousands. Some of them, in fact, have also

become part of the city’s narrative. Along with totem poles and Seeathl,

the homeless street Indian completes the city’s trinity of Native imagery.

This third kind of Indian place-story, however, is less often an indict-

ment of the injustices of the urban political economy than it is a tale

about racial inevitability. In short, stories about Native people on Seat-

tle’s streets are also a kind of ghost story. In Jack Cady’s murder mys-

tery Street, for example, the shape-shifting narrator takes on the form

of “an aging Tlingit seduced south from Alaska” who dreams of killer

whales and talking salmon, while in Still Life with Woodpecker, Tom Rob-

bins’s heroine Princess Leigh-Cheri wanders through downtown, notic-

ing that “Indian winos, in particular, were unhurried by the weather.”

Both Robbins and Cady conflate street Indians with the very atmosphere

of the city: Robbins cloaks his version of Seattle in a “shamanic rain”

that whispers “like the ecstasy of primitives,” while Cady’s city hun-

8



kers down under weather systems “more gray and ancient than a soli-

tary old Indian.” Meanwhile, in Hunting Mr. Heartbreak, Jonathan Raban

recalls seeing homeless Native people sprawled in a bricked-over door-

way in Belltown on his first visit to Seattle. They were “like sacks of

garbage waiting for collection by the early-morning truck. I tiptoed past

them,” he notes, “as one walks needlessly quietly in the presence of the

dead.”8

And so here is the moral of the urban Indian story as we think we

know it: that Native people in the city are barely people; they are instead

shades of the past, linked almost mystically to a lost nature. Cady spells

it out directly: one of his characters, a homeless Haida-Filipino man

named Jimmy, is described as “turning into a ghost right before our

eyes. That’s not a white man’s metaphor,” Cady’s narrator tells us. “It’s

an Indian fact.” It is as though the returning hosts, those phantoms

prophesied in the Chief Seattle Speech, have turned out to be nothing

more than homeless Indians. Even Seattle resident Sherman Alexie,

the Spokane–Coeur d’Alene Indian author rightly lauded for the com-

plicated humanity of his Native characters, slides effortlessly into this

urban parable. In his novel Indian Killer, in which “every city was a city

of white men,” racist cops and a serial killer share Seattle with a troupe

of Indians living under the Alaskan Way Viaduct, all dampening in that

same rain, here an “occupying force.” But his hero, John Smith, who

may or may not be the murderer scalping white men throughout the

city, has nothing to fear from the rain: “He was aboriginal,” Alexie writes.

“He stepped through this rain and fog without incident.” Even in Indian

Killer, otherwise a powerful meditation on what it means to be both mod-

ern and Indian, cities are somehow places where Native people cannot

belong except as half-fulfilled people or as ciphers for nature. Being a

metaphor in Seattle, it would seem, is an Indian fact.9

And if cities indelibly mark their Indian inhabitants in urban ghost

stories, then these homeless Indians also mark the city in return, and

not just in fictional accounts. Although more than ten thousand people

of indigenous ancestry—including lawyers and activists, bus drivers

and artists, bankers and newspaper editors—now call Seattle home, it

is the homeless Indians who are most visible in Seattle’s urban land-

T H E  H A U N T E D  C I T Y  /  9



scape and who in fact seem to make Seattle Seattle. They make Pike

Place Market’s public restrooms one of the city’s “true” landmarks

according to one local alternative weekly, because the toilets are “the

one place where bustling tourists, drunken Indians, and desperate

junkies come together . . . in a sort of cultural nexus, representing all

that is truly great about this fine city.” For some like local essayist Emily

Baillargeon, Native people on the streets signify urban inequality. “As

new corporate legions rush home or to their after-hours playgrounds,”

she wrote during the high-tech boom of the 1990s, “they brush past

alcoholic Native Americans camped out on rain-slicked corners.” Even

among the homeless themselves, Native people are part of Seattle’s

geography: one white street kid in the University District, for exam-

ple, noted that “downtown it’s all drunk Indians.” So while we can infer

from some ghost stories that Native people are somehow incapable of

being fully human in Seattle—that the urban and the Indian are some-

how antonyms—we also learn more about this place through stories

about Indians: what kind of city Seattle is, and who belongs where.10

None of this is to say that homelessness and other, more subtle forms

of dislocation are not central to the urban Indian experience. On the

contrary, loss of cultural identity, debilitating poverty, and institution-

alized racism have each shaped the lives of many Native people through-

out Seattle’s history. The history that follows makes this clear. The

problem with stories about metaphorical urban Indians, however, is that

they allow us to imagine only certain kinds of Native history in the city:

the parts we are prepared to see by the stories we tell. These stories mask

more complicated experiences: the surprising opportunities offered by

urban life, the creative struggles to carve out Indian spaces in the city,

and, most importantly, the ways in which Native women and men have

contributed to urban life. Stories of ghosts and totem poles and dis-

possessed chieftains cast Indians only as passive victims of, rather than

active participants in, the urban story. These place-stories are the easy

way out, allowing us to avoid doing our homework. In other words, they

make appealing fiction but bad history.

If the prophetic chieftains and totem poles, like the shamanic rains

and homeless ghosts, are all supposed to make Seattle somehow

1 0



unique (and each of these stories is tied closely to urban boosterism

and marketing, as we shall see), then it is surprising how closely Seat-

tle’s stories track with national narratives. Our city’s place-stories and

those of our nation mirror each other—Indians and cities exist at oppo-

site ends of the American imaginary; one represents the past, while

the other represents the future. For all their differences, last Mohicans,

final showdowns at Wounded Knees, and lone Ishis wandering out of

the California foothills are variations on the same theme: the inevitable

disappearance of indigenous peoples before the onslaught of Amer-

ican progress. Cities, on the other hand, are the ultimate avatars of that

progress, representing the pinnacle of American technology, commerce,

and cultural sophistication. It comes as no surprise, then, that many

nineteenth-century representations of American expansion show Indi-

ans watching forlornly as townscapes appear on the horizon. John Gast’s

famous American Progress (1872), for example, shows Progress embod-

ied as an enormous (and, dare we say it, ghostly) white woman float-

ing westward over the continent, trailing telegraph wire. Behind her, a

locomotive steams across the plains and a great city of bridges and

smokestacks sprawls in the sunrise, while ahead of her Indians and

buffalo flee into the shrinking darkness. Seattle’s counterpart is a 1906

brochure selling real estate on the tideflats south of downtown; it fea-

tures figures that look suspiciously like Hiawatha and Pocahontas gazing

over placid waters toward a belching urban skyline. These are place-

stories, telling us how the nation became what it is and who belongs

where—and when.11

If popular culture has placed cities and Indians at two ends of the

nation’s historical trajectory, then academic scholarship has given that

place-story its legitimacy. The connections between urban and Indian

histories—both in Seattle and across the nation—have yet to be made,

even in studies of the American West, a region defined both by its urban

nature and by the persistence of Native peoples. From the Allegheny

Mountains to the Pacific Coast, towns and cities were the vanguards of

American conquest, appearing (and sometimes disappearing again) with

stunning rapidity. The survival of western cities hinged on their ability

to control hinterlands of people, places, and things—loggers, goldfields,

T H E  H A U N T E D  C I T Y  /  1 1



water—and so the consolidation and conquest of the American West

were urban phenomena. In urban histories, however, Indians all too often

appear only in the introduction or first chapter, then exit stage left after

a treaty or a battle. Its regional mythology, and much of its scholarship,

still defined by the battle between civilization and savagery, the Amer-

ican West seems to have room for either cities or Indians but not both.12

Meanwhile, the vast literature on Native peoples in the American West

has uncovered the economic, political, cultural, and social components

of Indian dispossession, as well as the diverse ways in which Native people

responded, ranging from accommodation to resistance. Much of this

western Indian history has focused on reservations, and for a good rea-

son: these are the places where colonial policies created long paper trails,

and these are the places where indigenous and tribal ways of life have

remained most visible. In cities, Indians are harder to find, and as a result,

among the thousands of books, monographs, and articles on Indian his-

tory in the West, only a scant few focus on urban places.13

When scholars do study Indians in cities, their research falls into two

camps. First, there are studies of the problems facing Native people

in urban places, often focusing on the notion of “disaffiliation.” While

offering insights into the experiences of Native people in cities, such

studies (including many conducted in Seattle) often pathologize their

subjects and take for granted the alleged inability of many Native people

to cope with urban (and, by association, modern) life. The second kind

of scholarship about urban Indians, based in the New Social History

inspired by the civil-rights movements of the 1960s and 1970s, focuses

on the development of urban Indian organizations in cities through-

out the country. More than simply institutional histories, these works

also examine the role such organizations have played in the creation of

new Indian, and especially pan-Indian, identities. Increasingly, they are

written by Native people themselves. But virtually none of these works

of recent urban Indian history include the deeper, indigenous histo-

ries of the places where those organizations took form. If urban and

Native histories rarely speak to each other, then the histories of indige-

nous peoples on whose lands cities were built and the histories of

present-day urban Indian communities are also estranged.14

1 2



In Native Seattle, I bring together multiple kinds of Native history

in order to challenge the assumption that Indian and urban histories

are somehow mutually exclusive. I include histories of the indigenous

people of Seattle—of the Duwamish and Shilshole and Lake peoples

who helped birth the city and yet who bore its greatest burdens. I also

include histories of the many Indian migrants, from dozens of tribes

and communities, who have been coming to this place for much longer

than most of us realize. Lastly, I include the Chief Seattle Speech and

other Indian imagery that has often been closely linked to debates about

who belongs in the city and what it has meant to live in a place that has

been transformed so quickly and so utterly. 

Throughout Seattle’s past, the strands of urban and Indian history

have been entwined, and there is very little distance, in either space or

time, between the dispossession of local indigenous people, the rise of

an urban pan-Indian community, and the development of urban narra-

tives populated with Indian metaphors. At almost every turn, what it

meant to be urban and what it meant to be Native have been inextri-

cably linked in Seattle.

The histories in these pages are drawn not just from the mythic nar-

ratives of Seattle’s received history but from archival materials and oral

traditions. They are linked to particular places in the city, and to the dra-

matic changes that have, quite literally, taken place on Seattle’s shores

and hills and streets. While not as explicitly an environmental history as

other studies, Native Seattle nonetheless combats the urban-Indian-as-

metaphor stereotype by not only describing the lived experiences of Native

people in the city and its hinterland but by grounding the city within

particular Native places ranging from a fishing camp buried beneath

fill in the heart of the city to a British Columbia village linked to Seattle

by trade and migration. By examining the environmental transforma-

tions of these places and the movement of people, things, and symbols

between and among them, this book links Seattle’s urban Native pasts

to the broader scholarship regarding the resettlement of indigenous ter-

ritories, the ecology of cities and their hinterlands, and narratives regard-

ing nature, culture, and history.

One place where these kinds of histories come together is Pioneer

T H E  H A U N T E D  C I T Y  /  1 3



Place Park at the corner of First Avenue and Yesler Way, where a long-

vanished sawmill once powered Seattle’s commercial beginnings. Here,

a Tlingit totem pole, a bronze bust of Seeathl, and an art installation

calling attention to the struggles of homeless Indians represent the three

facets of Seattle’s Native iconography: the exotic aesthetics of the north-

ern Northwest Coast, the noble urban namesake, and the pathetic Indian

of the streets. Pioneer Place Park, like the historic Pioneer Square neigh-

borhood that surrounds it, is an archive of urban narratives. But in Whul-

shootseed, the indigenous language of Puget Sound country, neither

carries the name “Pioneer,” a word that reflects only one version of his-

tory. In Whulshootseed, it is “Little Crossing-Over Place.” Long before

Henry Yesler set up his sawmill, this was a tidal lagoon tucked behind

a small island. It was home to great cedar longhouses, whose residents

fished for flounders in the lagoon, gathered berries and bulbs in nearby

prairies, drank clear water from springs in the hillside, and buried their

dead on a bluff overlooking Elliott Bay. Before it was a place of narra-

tives about Indians, then, this was a place inhabited by Indians. And

long after Yesler’s sawmill had burned, Pioneer Place became, for a while

at least, the heart of an urban Indian community whose members eked

out a living in the district of flophouses and taverns that birthed the

term “skid road.” Different places with the same set of coordinates, Lit-

tle Crossing-Over Place, Skid Road, and Pioneer Place Park are three

layers in an urban palimpsest, a gathering of place-stories. In between

them lie ashes and sawdust, brick and asphalt, opportunity and misery—

in other words, the detritus of Seattle’s Native multiple pasts.

There is Little Crossing-Over Place, where an indigenous commu-

nity gave way to sawmills and single-resident occupancy hotels, but there

is also the larger crossing-over place of Seattle as a whole. Go virtually

anywhere in Seattle, and you are close to it. Among the bungalows and

beachside biking trails are the home of a sacred horned serpent, the

site of a burning longhouse, and an upland clearing full of marsh tea

and cranberries. Between and behind the art galleries and gas stations

are the first Indian Center, the riverside studio of a Native artist hired

to carve totem poles, and the apartment of a woman down from Juneau

to get an education. The entire city is a palimpsest, a text erased only

1 4



partially and then written over again. It is a landscape of places changed

by power, of Indian places transformed into urban ones and sometimes

back again. Or, to borrow the words of historian James Ronda, the story

of Seattle is “a story about power and places, and what happens when

power changes places, and then how places are in turn changed.” Seat-

tle’s past is rich with these kinds of crossings.15

Native Seattle is also intended as a crossing of different kinds of his-

tory. Beyond bringing together urban and Indian histories, it also brings

cultural, social, and environmental histories into conversation with each

other. Literary criticism and postcolonial studies have emphasized the

power of narrative to define, debase, and control the Other, and Seat-

tle is no exception. The place-stories told in this city were a key method

of dispossession and discrimination, and in trying to understand them,

Native Seattle is a cultural history. But as Cole Harris, the elder states-

man of Canadian geography, has shown, it is not enough to merely

tell stories about stories: we must look beyond the literary and cultural

forms of colonialism to examine the material conditions that ultimately

implemented those stories. We need to examine the roles that physical

power, the state, flows of capital, and technologies like law and mapping

played in turning indigenous territory into a modern metropolis. I accom-

plish this here through the lenses of social history—the unearthing of

the lived experiences of ordinary people—and environmental history.

Nature may not have agency in this story as clearly as it does in most

works of environmental history, but the irruptions of unfinished his-

tory, so common in Seattle’s urban story, are grounded in place. As the

land is transformed, it gives up new stories and reveals new layers of

the past, and in those new stories can be found the agency of ancient,

inhabited natures. Finally, it should not be forgotten that all environ-

mental history in the Americas, by definition, is Native history, because

it has all happened on Indian land.16

With these multiple Native histories in mind, then, Seattle’s story

can offer insights into other places. For all its uniqueness (again, few

large American cities have so consistently used Indian imagery to define

their own image), Seattle’s history suggests that other cities may have

urban Indian stories of their own. In Chicago, with its origins in the

T H E  H A U N T E D  C I T Y  /  1 5



Fort Dearborn “massacre,” or in New York City and its “$24 Question,”

as Edwin G. Burrows and Mike Wallace have called the Dutch purchase

of indigenous Manhattan, the opportunities exist for a new kind of urban

history that begins with those cities’ place-stories. Meanwhile, bring-

ing the benevolent friars and pious neophytes who haunt the place-

stories of Californian cities into conversation with Native social history

might reorient the meaning of places like San Francisco and Los Ange-

les. Every American city—Boston, Omaha, Honolulu, Savannah—has

the potential for this kind of history, as do places like Vancouver or Vera-

cruz, Sapporo or Sydney, or any other place shaped by encounters

between the urban and the indigenous.17

In the end, though, all history is local, and so I limit my view to one

city, and in doing so reorient Seattle’s urban story by placing its Native

histories at the center. I challenge narratives of civic progress by focus-

ing on the costs, both planned and unforeseen, of urban development.

This is not always a happy story. In his classic, remarkable study of

the Marquesas, Greg Dening describes the metaphorical islands and

beaches—the categories of “we” and “they” and the boundaries between

them—that shaped the history of real islands and beaches in the Pacific.

He notes that, for the people who experienced them, and to some extent

for the people who study them, “the remaking of those sorts of islands

and the crossing of those sorts of beaches can be cruelly painful.” This

is certainly true of Seattle’s history or, in the words of poet Colleen McEl-

roy, “Seattle’s awful history, where all that is breathtaking is breath tak-

ing.” This is not always a happy story, but perhaps more importantly,

it is rarely a simple one either.18

Seattle is haunted by urban conquest and by its many Native pasts.

But put the ghost stories aside, and see what happened here before the

ghosts came. Begin at the supposed beginning, at the moment when

the first breath was taken: in Seattle’s version of the encounter between

Pawtuxet and Plymouth, between indigenous and European worlds. On

a beach, to be precise.

1 6


























2 / Terra Miscognita

I
n the words of one descendant of the Denny Party, as Seat-

tle’s founders are typically called, the story of the city’s origin “is an

oft-told tale yet is ever new.” Indeed. In the century and a half since

the landing of Arthur Denny and his compatriots on the beach at

Alki Point on 13 November 1851, Seattle’s creation story has been

reduced, reused, recycled, and reenacted in books, plays, speeches, and

art. Often, the telling of the story says more about the moment of the

telling than about the event itself; we will encounter many such recount-

ings throughout Seattle’s Native histories. The basic story, however, has

remained the same. Seattle historian Murray Morgan captured the scene

best in his 1951 “history from the bottom up,” Skid Road. In this peren-

nially popular tale of the politics and personalities of Seattle’s first cen-

tury, Morgan described the arrival of the twenty-four settlers on a rainy

beach:

Three of the four women cried when the brig’s boat put them ashore on the

salt-smelling beach. Portland had been rude and the ship awful, but this was

worse: the only habitation was a log cabin, still roofless, and the only neigh-

bors a host of bowlegged Indians, the men wearing only buckskin breech-

clouts, the women skirts of cedar bark, the children naked. The sky was low

and gray, the air sharp with salt and iodine, the wind cold; but soon the

women were too busy to weep.

Morgan’s version of the story has it all: the miserable passage on the

schooner Exact, the dismal weather, the crying women, the unfinished

cabin. And most importantly, the story has Indians. Possibly danger-

ous, certainly alien, their presence makes the story all the more dra-

1 7



matic. It is in this moment—in the tense introduction between two

peoples—that Seattle’s urban history begins. And to no small extent,

it is the moment when, according to the standard version of Seattle’s

storyline, local Indian history begins to end.1

Seattle’s creation story is not even really a story at all, but rather a

snapshot. Certainly, the Denny Party’s overland journey from Illinois

is part of the back-story, but it is really the singularity of the landing at

Alki Point, across Elliott Bay from present-day downtown, that is the

mythic point of beginning, in which longer processes are collapsed into

a frozen moment in time. In this respect, Seattle’s creation story is like

many others. In a 1991 essay about evolution and baseball, for exam-

ple, natural historian Stephen Jay Gould argued that stories about begin-

nings “come in only two basic modes. An entity either has an explicit

point of origin, a specific time and place of creation, or else it evolves

and has no definable moment of entry into the world.” In his account of

the differences between the sport’s gradual evolution from a “plethora of

previous stick-and-ball games” and the more mythic story of Coopers-

town, Gould noted that “we seem to prefer the . . . model of origin by

a moment of creation—for then we can have heroes and sacred places.”

The same is true for American history more broadly: we love our

Mayflowers, Lexingtons, and Fort Sumters. They are discrete moments

chosen out of the complexity of the past and designated as the place

where one thing is said to end and another to begin.2

In Seattle, where the heroes are the Denny Party and the sacred place

is Alki Point, that snapshot in place and time has literally been turned

into a shrine of sorts. At the Museum of History and Industry, the city’s

official repository of its past, a diorama displays the events of that blus-

tery November day. Comprising wax figures, handmade miniature cloth-

ing, shellacked greenery, and a painted beachscape backdrop, the

diorama was created in 1953 by local doll maker Lillian Smart to com-

memorate Seattle’s recent centenary and to celebrate the museum’s open-

ing. It includes all the stock characters and props of the city’s founding

myth: a roofless cabin at the forest’s edge, tiny handkerchiefs lifted to

wax faces, and children’s heads turned warily toward Chief Seattle and

a few other Indian men. The tableau made manifest the story that Seat-

1 8



tle residents had already been telling themselves for decades, and within

a few months of the diorama’s unveiling, its sponsors—the Alki Women’s

Improvement Club and the West Seattle Business Association—claimed

that “thousands of Seattle residents, tourists, and school children have

stood in front of it, admiring its beauty and realism, and paying silent

homage to Seattle’s founders.” For more than two generations of Seat-

tleites, visiting the diorama has been a kind of urban pilgrimage. Still

on display at the beginning of the twenty-first century, Smart’s power-

ful visual distillation of the city’s creation story is the image that most

likely comes to many local residents’ minds when they think of Seat-

tle’s founding.3

Not unlike baseball’s creation story or the origin myth of the nation

itself, with its providential Pilgrims landing in that single sacred

moment at the place they named Plymouth, Seattle’s creation story is

also one of predestination. For all the drama of crying women, threat-

ening skies, and strange Indians, Seattle’s future seems a done deal.

Civic booster and local historian Welford Beaton, for example, reiter-

ated the title of his book The City That Made Itself by claiming that “Seat-

tle started deliberately.” Nearby titles on any local library shelf express

the same sense of nascent destiny, of future greatness born in those

first moments at Alki. Outdoing Beaton, Mayor George Cotterill’s Cli-

max of a World Quest reads Seattle’s twentieth-century future back onto

the voyages of explorers like Vancouver, Cook, and even Magellan. In

local mythology, the arrival of “Seattle’s Pilgrims” is deliberate, planned,

and preordained, sprung like Athena from the collective forehead of

Arthur Denny and the other members of his party. As for the indige-

nous people encountered in the creation moment at Alki Point, their

future was also foretold, written in disease and dispossession. The pow-

erful story of the “vanishing red man,” as we shall see, both informed

the Denny Party’s journey to Puget Sound in the first place and has

informed the telling of their landing at Alki ever since. It is one of the

foundational pillars of Seattle’s standard civic narrative, in which one

kind of history (Indian) begins to decline the moment another history

(urban) starts its ascent.4

But beginnings and endings are rarely clear in history, and the events

T E R R A  M I S C O G N I TA /  1 9



that we call history were rarely as deliberate or discrete as we imagine

them to be from our vantage point in the present. Like most creation

stories, whether of a sport or of a nation, Seattle’s origin myth obscures

more about actual historical events than it reveals. First, it renders invis-

ible a complex local indigenous landscape of stories reaching back to

the ice age, of villages made wealthy by river and prairie and tideflat,

and of numinous forces beyond human understanding. Second, by com-

pressing the landing of 1851 into a single moment, it ignores earlier

processes of empire and ecology that set the stage for city making on

Puget Sound. Third, it obscures the ambitions and imaginations of the

Denny Party themselves, ascribing to them motivations and knowledge

that are more ours than theirs. Finally, it sets urban founders and indige-

nous people—and, through them, urban and Indian history—in oppo-

sition, as seemingly alien to each other as the two groups that met on

the beach that November in 1851. 

But if we widen our view beyond that one day of that one year on

that one beach, Seattle’s creation story takes on a very different form,

looking more like Gould’s blurry account of baseball’s actual evolu-

tion. Rather than a single moment of creation, in this version of the

story urban founding on Puget Sound becomes a complex, contingent

process in which indigenous worlds are misapprehended, empires vie

for dominance, and future city fathers change their minds and make

mistakes. And most importantly, in this other kind of creation story

indigenous people and places are at the center of the telling and have

everything to do with getting to the place called Seattle. Well before the

city’s mythic moment of birth, Seattle’s urban and Indian histories were

already being bound together in a landscape rich with contested mean-

ings and possibilities.

B
efore the arrival of the exact and the Denny Party,

perhaps in the 1830s, a young man named Wahalchoo was

hunting sea ducks off a promontory of open grassy spaces

among wind-stunted trees, known to him as Prairie Point. He

was looking for more than scoters and scaups; Wahalchoo had been

fasting and was also in search of spirit power. He found it there near

2 0



Prairie Point, if only briefly. While retrieving spent arrows, he spied a

vast longhouse deep in the green waters, surrounded by herds of elk

and with schools of salmon swimming over its cedar-plank roof. This,

Wahalchoo knew, was the home of a power that brought wealth, gen-

erosity, and respect to those who carried it. With its help, Wahalchoo

could become a great leader. He went home to find his father, who

could help him obtain the power, but the older man was away, and

when Wahalchoo returned to Prairie Point, the waters were clear but

empty. The longhouse beneath the waves had disappeared, and Wahal-

choo was left to seek power elsewhere.5

Indigenous people like Wahalchoo (who would, some twenty-five

years later, make his mark on a treaty under the Christian name Jacob)

moved through landscapes that were dense with meaning. The proof

is in the names. Prairie Point, which would become Alki Point in 1851,

was but one named place on a peninsula bordered on the west and north

by deep salt water and on the east by a meandering river and its estu-

ary. The headland that brooded to the east of Prairie Point was Low Point,

while to the south along the outer shore, a creek called Capsized came

pouring out of the forest near a place called Rids the Cold; south of there

were headlands called Tight Bluff and Place of Scorched Bluff. Together,

these place-names map the indigenous landscape: open places among

the forest, cliffs tightly crowded with brush or blackened by mineral

deposits. They are also the closest things we have to photographs of the

pre-urban world; by the time landscape photographers arrived in Seat-

tle, most of these places had been utterly transformed.

But photographs, like dioramas, are static, and the world around

Prairie Point was not. Thrust out into the currents and storm paths of

Puget Sound, the point’s sand and stone were built up in one season,

then swept away in another; before the seawalls and bulkheads of the

modern era, the promontory constantly shifted, sometimes subtly and

at other times abruptly. Similarly, the indigenous landscapes of what

would come to be known as Puget Sound country were changing long

before the arrival of the Denny Party in 1851. Some of these changes

were slow, others catastrophic, as Prairie Point snagged overlapping nets

of power, knowledge, and ecology over the course of centuries. When

T E R R A  M I S C O G N I TA /  2 1



Arthur Denny and the rest came to Alki Point, which they called New

York, they intruded upon a world already in the midst of profound changes.

New networks of trade, imperial reconnaissance, and, most important

of all, epidemic disease each served as preludes to the founding of an

American city.

The first written records of the lands and waters around the future

Seattle come from 1792, when British explorer George Vancouver and

his crew sailed into the inland sea aboard the Discovery. Like most Euro-

pean explorers, Vancouver spent little time trying to ascertain indige-

nous peoples’ own knowledge of their world. His journals contain few

Native words and say little of the region’s indigenous geography;

instead, they are filled with names like Whidbey and Rainier. They are

examples of what geographer Daniel W. Clayton has called “imperial

fashioning,” in which indigenous places were reinscribed with Euro-

pean nomenclature and incorporated into the colonial geographies of

European nation-states. Even the name for the sea itself—given in honor

of Vancouver’s subordinate Peter Puget, who had diligently surveyed so

much of it—transformed the inland sea, whose indigenous name sim-

ply meant “salt water,” into a British waterway with an Anglo-Norman

pedigree. It transformed the undifferentiated space of terra incognita into

place, or “space with a history,” emptying it of its indigenous history—

at least on official maps—and making it part of a North America lit-

tered with historical references to European people and places. This was

also one of Seattle’s first kinds of urban history, in its linking of indige-

nous places like “Puget Sound” to imperial centers such as London. But

underneath this refashioned landscape lay another geography; for vir-

tually every imperial Puget there was an indigenous counterpart, even

if Vancouver and his men simply could not, or would not, see it. It was

less terra incognita than it was terra miscognita.6

For the terra here already included an urban history of its own. When

Wahalchoo returned home for help in obtaining wealth and power, he

went, not to some hovel in the wilderness, but to a proud village called

Place of Clear Water, with a great cedar longhouse that was one of the

largest indigenous structures in North America. Not far away, just around

Low Point from the place where Wahalchoo had gone diving for power,

2 2



was another settlement: Herring’s House, made up of several longhouses

and a larger house used for winter ceremonies. Neither settlement was

just a “village,” a term that may connote primitiveness and transience.

Instead, these were places where elite families coordinated social

alliances, religious observances, and resource distribution. Although

not large in terms of population—both Herring’s House and Place of

Clear Water likely had only several scores of residents each—they and

other indigenous winter settlements functioned as towns in relation-

ship to their territories. Natural resources, political power, and spiri-

tual force circulated through these settlements in ways reminiscent of

the networks enmeshing larger urban places in other parts of the world—

Captain Vancouver’s London included.7

Each of these winter towns, along with nearby seasonal camps,

resource sites, and sacred places, was linked into a broader geographic

community through webs of kinship, trade, and diplomacy. Through-

out Puget Sound, these larger communities (many of which would

become known as tribes through relations with the American federal

government in the nineteenth century) were typically organized around

watersheds, and there were three such groups in the territories that

would someday become Seattle. Herring’s House, for example, was part

of a larger constellation of communities whose members called them-

selves the People of the Inside Place, after the location of their main

settlements inland from the Sound. Their name for themselves would

be anglicized as “Duwamish.” A second group, known as the Hachoo-

absh, or Lake People, and usually described as a band of the Duwamish,

lived in towns ringing a vast, deep lake behind the hills fronting Puget

Sound. A third group, with connections to the first two as well as to the

people of Place of Clear Water (who are now known as the Suquamish),

was the Shilshoolabsh, the People of Tucked Away Inside, who took

their name from their main settlement on the tidal inlet that the Amer-

icans would call Salmon Bay. These three indigenous communities—

the Duwamish, the Lakes, and the Shilsholes—each had their own

towns, with names like Place of the Fish Spear and Little Canoe Chan-

nel, and each town in turn had its own hinterland of prairies and ceme-

teries, fish camps and hunting grounds. These local geographies were

T E R R A  M I S C O G N I TA /  2 3



themselves connected through trade and kinship to communities as

far away as the arid interior plateau of the Columbia River and the coast

of Vancouver Island, knitting the entire region together in a compli-

cated indigenous weave of towns and territories.8

When Discovery came into Salt Water in June of 1792, that weave

was already fraying. With few exceptions, Puget Sound country seemed

“nearly destitute of human beings” to the Englishmen. Vancouver wrote

that “animated nature seemed nearly exhausted; and her awful silence

was only now and then interrupted by the croaking of a raven, the breath-

ing of a seal, or the scream of an eagle.” After several encounters with

Native people, one reason for the silence became clear: smallpox. “This

deplorable disease,” Vancouver wrote, “is not only common, but it is

greatly to be apprehended is very fatal among them, as its indelible marks

were seen on many.” Blind eyes, pockmarked skin, and other ravages

familiar to any urban European were clear evidence that the scourge of

Variola had visited the local people, and indeed, at least one major epi-

demic had already swept through the region. Likely extrapolating from

his own experiences in the great cities of Europe, Vancouver imagined

what had been lost as his expedition came upon the remains of Native

communities where “since their abdication, or extermination, nothing

but the smaller shrubs and plants had yet been able to rear their heads.”

Vancouver and other Europeans tended to see indigenous North Amer-

icans as “people without history,” but the evidence of that history, in

the form of fallen-in roofs and prairies unburned by their cultivators

and reverting to forest, was everywhere.9

Dramatic changes like those caused by Comes Out All Over, as small-

pox was known in the local language, were nothing new to the indige-

nous people of “Puget’s Sound.” Their ancestors had arrived some ten

millennia earlier, just as vast glaciers were retreating from the region,

and their creation stories describe a chaotic post–ice age world where

rivers flowed in both directions, the earth shifted, and brutal cold

harassed the people until Dookweebathl, the Changer, brought order

to things. It would take millennia for the climate to stabilize and for

salmon and cedar, the two most important benefactors of later indige-

nous life, to colonize the region, while volcanic eruptions, massive earth-

2 4



quakes, and catastrophic mudflows routinely punctuated Native history

with episodes of devastation. For the hierarchical societies living on the

shores of Salt Water, change produced anxiety: the word dookw, “to

change” or “transform,” is the root for a host of concepts including worry,

dissatisfaction, anger, infirmity, and ferocity. At the same time, it is also

the root of the words for “yesterday” and “tomorrow”—an indication

that change was a constant in indigenous life before the arrival of Euro-

peans and that the “people without history” were people with a past.10

Few of these changes, however, had consequences as dramatic, wide-

spread, and permanent as the introduction of smallpox and other dis-

eases into the local ecology. The microbial intrusion, followed not long

after by that of Vancouver and his crew, presaged—indeed, facilitated—

the coming of an even greater change: the settlement of the country

by people of European descent. The voyage of the Discovery had little

direct impact on the people of Salt Water, but in places like London and

Boston and Washington, Vancouver’s accounts inspired ambitious Brit-

ons and Americans to establish a permanent presence in the region,

encouraged by accounts of a dwindling indigenous population. The first

Americans came in 1841, when the United States Exploring Expedition,

led by Lieutenant Charles Wilkes, sailed up the Sound. The “Ex. Ex.,”

as the expedition was known, was among other things tasked with

strengthening American claims to lands north of the Columbia River,

still held jointly by Britain and the United States. Not surprisingly, the

mission included naming. As the crews of Wilkes’s sloop of war Vin-

cennes and its attendant brig Porpoise carefully mapped the bays and

inlets, they added a new set of names to Puget Sound’s growing impe-

rial geography. That summer, Prairie Point obtained its first English-

language name when it was christened Point Roberts after the Ex. Ex.’s

physician.11

Like Vancouver, Wilkes found that the landscapes of Puget Sound

“savoured of civilization.” As for the indigenous residents, their appar-

ently small numbers suggested that the “Indians of Puget Sound,” as

they had been named, were unlikely to stand in the way of white set-

tlement, and even if they did, new waves of disease were “rapidly thin-

ning them off.” The real threat for Wilkes and for the Congress that

T E R R A  M I S C O G N I TA /  2 5



sent him came not from indigenous people but from the British, who

were establishing a year-round presence at Fort Nisqually on the south-

ern Sound. As facilitators of the highly dynamic fur trade, Fort Nis-

qually’s Hudson’s Bay Company factors were always looking for new

places to build, and for a short time Prairie Point was a candidate for

one of these outlying bastions of mercantile capitalism. An 1833 sur-

vey by Fort Nisqually physician William Tolmie provided the first writ-

ten description of the point (“flat and dotted with small pines, and the

soil . . . mostly sand”) and the first mentions of its surrounding envi-

rons and the “Tuomish” Indians, who he noted were “miserably poor

and destitute of firearms.” But despite the apparent friendliness of the

local people—some surely led by Seeathl—it was a bad place for an out-

post, with poor soil and no freshwater. With the signing of a treaty

between Britain and the United States in 1846, the issue became moot;

British influence at Fort Nisqually faded, although the fort’s presence

continued to have far-reaching consequences. During an outbreak of

dysentery and measles in the winter of 1847–48, Native people from

all over Puget Sound, including the territories in and around the future

Seattle, traded there and took the microbes home with them.12

Despite wave after wave of disease—at least five separate epidemics

by 1850—indigenous people remained the dominant presence around

Salt Water, as Samuel Hancock, one of the first American settlers on

Puget Sound, learned when he stopped at Prairie Point in 1849. “A great

many Indians came from their houses to the beach here, to ascertain

where we came from,” he wrote, adding that they seemed “well disposed”

toward him. Hancock traded with the people, exchanging tobacco and

looking glasses for clams and salmon. Although buffeted by strength-

ening storms of change during the early nineteenth century, symbol-

ized by new place-names, new diseases, and new things to buy and sell,

Prairie Point was still very much an indigenous place when Hancock

visited. The place where the Exact would drop anchor two years later

was still more Salt Water than Puget Sound. Nothing illustrates this more

than the word Hancock used to describe the growing number of white

settlers in the region: he called them Whulgers, using the indigenous

2 6



word for Salt Water to describe those who thought they were coming

to Puget’s Sound.13

W
hile arthur denny is unanimously credited

with being the father of Seattle, that title could just as

easily go to a forgotten figure named George Brock. A

resident of the Willamette Valley at the western end of

the Oregon Trail, Brock appears only briefly, not unlike one of Shake-

speare’s plot-driving apparitions, in the story of the Denny Party’s jour-

ney west. When the Denny and Boren families arrived at the confluence

of the Burnt and Snake rivers, Brock was there, and in the shadow of

bunchgrass-covered hills blackened by summer wildfires, he warned

Arthur Denny that the best Willamette land was already spoken for but

that another region ideal for settlement lay just to the north. In his mem-

oirs, Denny recalled that his attention “was thus turned to the Sound,

and I formed the purpose of looking in that direction.” Brock’s bit of

rumor and speculation—he apparently had never seen Puget Sound—

effectively and suddenly diverted the two Illinois families. As they labored

up the difficult Burnt River Canyon toward the Columbia, they were

now on their way not to the oak-dotted prairies of the Willamette but

to the timber-shadowed shores of Salt Water.14

But if Arthur Denny seems to have been easily swayed by the shad-

owy Brock, his group did not rush headlong into unknown territory.

Instead, their tentative, incremental steps toward settlement reflect

the cautious, mindful demeanor for which Seattle’s founders were

renowned. In September 1851, as family members lay bedridden with

fever in Portland hotel rooms, Arthur Denny interviewed Thomas Cham-

bers, a Puget Sound settler in town on business. Chambers provided

Denny with his first firsthand account of the territory to the north, includ-

ing the indigenous inhabitants, who he said were “friendly and they

were glad to have the Bostons—as they called the Americans—to come.”

Chambers’s testimony cemented Denny’s intentions to lead the group

to the Sound. Meanwhile, Arthur’s brother David and new compatriot

John Low headed to Olympia, a tiny settlement built around tideflats

T E R R A  M I S C O G N I TA /  2 7



at the head of the Sound. There, they met two men who would make

the landing at Alki Point possible: Leander Terry, who was also look-

ing to settle on the inland sea, and Captain Robert Fay, a retired whal-

ing captain who wanted to hire local Indians to catch salmon, preserve

it at Point Roberts, and load it onto ships bound for San Francisco. Fay

offered Denny, Low, and Terry seats in his open scow, and on 25 Sep-

tember, the four men came ashore just inside Low Point, around the

headland from where Wahalchoo had dived for power years before.

There, they found scores of Indians waiting. Among them was the head-

man who had agreed to procure indigenous workers for the venture:

Seeathl.15

His business arrangements complete, Fay left Terry, Denny, and Low

to explore the area. Land reconnaissance was largely out of the ques-

tion thanks to a bewildering landscape of tideflats, salt marshes, and

dense forest, so after hiring two indigenous men from the camp to serve

as guides, the three Americans headed up the Duwamish River by canoe.

Had Low, Terry, or Denny been able to converse with their guides in Whul-

shootseed instead of a crude combination of hand signs and Chinook

Jargon, they might have learned the ancient and practical names of land-

marks on the river: shortcuts, trailheads, backwaters. They might have

learned the names for the river’s abundance: salmon-drying frames, duck

nets stretched between tall poles, fine carving wood. Their guides might

not, however, have told them of the numinous places along the river

and its delta: a boulder carved with shamanic power spirits, the home

of a malevolent spirit that took the form of a fingerless hand rising from

the water, the ruins of an ancient fish weir dating to the time of the

Changer. More than just a resource territory, the valley of the Duwamish

was also a place rich with stories and powers, but the guides apparently

shared none of this knowledge with their charges, and even if they had,

they would likely have been misunderstood. This was not only because

of the vast differences between English and Whulshootseed, but because

the settlers and their guides also spoke two mutually unintelligible lan-

guages of landscape. Where indigenous people saw spirits and nets and

carving wood—the wealth of the land as it was and had been—Denny

and the others saw the wealth of the land as it could and would be,

2 8



expressed in words like “arable,” “improvement,” and “export.” And so

after their reconnaissance was complete, David Denny penned a note

to his brother, decreeing that the valley of the Duwamish had “room

enough for one thousand travelers.” The decision to found a city had

been made, and Low caught Captain Fay’s next scow back to Olympia,

on his way to Portland with the news. If any moment must be named

as the birth of Seattle, then surely this was it.16

In fact, though, some of those thousand travelers had already

arrived, and they and their indigenous neighbors helped prepare the

way for the rest of the Denny Party. A month before Denny, Low, and

Terry arrived at Seeathl’s fishing camp, Luther Collins, Henry Van Asselt,

and Jacob and Samuel Mapel had joined some seven hundred Indians

camped at Low Point before setting out to stake claims in the valley of

the Duwamish. While Denny and Terry set to building a cabin, with

Native workers paid in bread for their assistance, local Indians and whites

made their presence known. On one day, for example, Collins and a

Native man known as Nisqually John drove a team of oxen past on the

beach; on another, “Old Duwampsh Curley” and several other Indians

came to visit, offering Denny and Terry a meal of roast duck. Not long

after, Terry hitched a ride to Olympia in Collins’s scow to gather the

rest of the party in Portland. David Denny was left “alone” to continue

work on a cabin for his family and their cohort.17

When the thousand-travelers note arrived in Portland, Arthur Denny

and the rest of his party, healed from their bouts of ague and joined by

the Bell family from Indiana, booked passage on a two-masted schooner

called the Exact. On 5 November, they left Portland, crossed the Colum-

bia’s murderous bar, and headed north along the coast. Along with the

families bound for David Denny’s cabin at Alki, the Exact carried other

settlers hoping to establish homes on Puget Sound and miners, many

straight from the California goldfields, on their way to the Queen Char-

lotte Islands far to the north. More than a week later, on 13 November,

the twenty-four “Pilgrims” made landfall at Prairie Point and were greeted

by a very grateful David Denny, who was suffering mightily from a fresh

axe wound on his foot. Then came the famed moment of creation: the

crying, the rain, the anxious meeting with Seeathl and his people.18

T E R R A  M I S C O G N I TA /  2 9



The date may be the same, but the historical circumstances of this

urban founding bear few similarities to the singular, deliberate, and pre-

ordained landing described in Seattle’s traditional creation story. Instead,

the story of the Denny Party’s arrival at Alki Point is one of rumors and

abrupt changes in plans; of illness and accidents; of Native towns and

other settlers who got there first. Most importantly, the story has active

Indian players: the labor contractor Seeathl, the guides who took the

first members of the Denny Party up the river, even Nisqually John and

Old Duwampsh Curley. Their presence and agency set the story, not in

an emptied-out wilderness, but in a still densely populated indigenous

world. The process of getting to Alki—of founding an American city

on Salt Water—had depended in no small part upon indigenous people

and places. The process of getting along at Alki would as well. This

would prove to be the greatest mistake made in apprehending the

topography of terra miscognita: the idea that founding a city could take

place without the presence—indeed, the tolerance—of indigenous

people.

W
hen the denny party landed at the point, they

called it neither Prairie Point nor Seattle. Instead, the

tiny American outpost was christened New York. Over

time, it would come to be known as New York–Alki, a

moniker meaning “New York by-and-by” or “New York eventually” in

the local lingua franca of Chinook Jargon. In the middle of the nine-

teenth century, the metropolis at the mouth of the Hudson River was

the ne plus ultra of American aspiration, the model to which new cities

on the nation’s urban frontier aspired. It was the commercial capital

of the nation and reached out with steamers, railways, newspapers,

and retail houses into the rapidly expanding antebellum nation. More

than simply the economic center of the country, though, New York

was also its cultural hearth. While some critics had begun to describe

New York as a “wicked city,” it was more commonly lauded as the driver

of American progress, its success the result of a refined, cultured urban

environment that stimulated the nation’s intellectual and social devel-

opment. The founders might have chosen a different name for their

3 0



hopeful settlement just three or four decades later, after waves of immi-

gration, exposés of urban violence, and new attitudes about the per-

ils of modern urban life had changed the meaning of New York. But

to a tiny clutch of families in a half-finished cabin on a Puget Sound

beach in 1851, Gotham must have seemed the apotheosis of urban

ambition.19

Leander Terry and his younger brother Charles were from upstate

New York and had likely had firsthand experiences with America’s pre-

mier city. But for the majority of Seattle’s founders, the frontier towns

of Illinois shaped their vision for Puget Sound’s New York in ways a

distant Gotham never could have. In 1850, when the Denny and Boren

families left home for Oregon, Knox County, Illinois, was in the midst

of an urban revolution. Permanent white settlement in the area had

begun only in the 1830s, but by midcentury the forests of sugar maple,

basswood, and wild cherry were giving way as families headed by men

with stolid biblical names like Israel and Azel and Hiram established

farms and feedlots. Life on the farms revolved around the young town

of Abingdon, whose limestone buildings and prim grid of streets sat on

high rolling ground above a tributary of the Spoon River. Town life in

Abingdon, a satellite of St. Louis, was orderly: liquor violations, morals

charges, and murders were virtually unheard of, and judges handed

out one hundred percent conviction rates for such disorderly acts as

“wantonly” burning prairies. (We might ask if it was the fire itself or

the wantonness with which it was lit that was so criminal.) “Court days”

were a primary form of entertainment in this straitlaced town, and the

Cherry Grove Seminary, founded by Cumberland Presbyterians, was

the dominant cultural institution. It was from this buttoned-up Protes-

tant world that Seattle’s “Pilgrims” came.20

But if Knox County seems to us almost stereotypically midwestern,

it was in fact part of the “Old Northwest,” and its orderliness and peace

stood on foundations of chaos and war. In 1850, Abingdon was on St.

Louis’s urban periphery, but only twenty years earlier, it had been at the

edge of the pays d’en haut, a vast region crisscrossed by trade networks.

These networks, along which furs and other commodities made their

way, reached between the centers of European and Asian society and

T E R R A  M I S C O G N I TA /  3 1



indigenous communities like those of the Coiracoentanon, who lived

along the banks of what they called the Amaquonsippi and what Amer-

icans would call the Spoon. By the eighteenth century, what had been

a “middle ground” of accommodation had become what historian

Richard White has called a “world of fragments,” as European empires

and indigenous nations vied for power. The violence of the period led

many Coiracoentanon to leave the valley of the Amaquonsippi for

refugee settlements to the south. The last local conflict, known as the

Black Hawk War, saw the end of indigenous tenure in what could then

become Knox County. With treaties only a quarter century old nullified

by war, the surviving Coirancoentanon had by 1832 “disappeared for-

ever from this locality” according to one early writer, with “none of the

whites knowing when or where they went.”21

The result was that the Dennys and other settlers of 1840s Knox

County had very little contact with Native people, although evidence of

the indigenous past lay all around them. Settlers regularly came across

earthen mounds, flint arrowheads, and the ruins of wigwams as they

plowed and felled. Indians also remained part of local memory in accounts

of war. Social power in Knox County typically sprang out of the Black

Hawk War, whose veterans and organizers translated their military lead-

ership into civilian political careers, and so the foundations of Abing-

don’s new urban order actually lay in chaos and violence. The Lows,

from nearby Bloomington, Illinois, and the Bells, from more distant

Edwardsville, Indiana, had all likely had similar experiences in Amer-

ican towns built in the former pays d’en haut; William Bell’s father, for

example, had been a ranger during the wars of American expansion.

The Denny Party brought with them both visions of urban order (and

perhaps resigned expectations of war with a “doomed” race) and very

little firsthand experience with Native people.22

On Puget Sound, those visions and expectations collided with the

realities of settling in Puget Sound. They collided, first, with the fact

that Indian people were not about to disappear with the arrival of the

urban frontier and, second, with the dawning reality that, while war

was always a possibility, for the most part indigenous people were plan-

ning to participate in the creation of that frontier. Founding a city in

3 2



the Pacific Northwest meant living alongside Native men, women, and

children. Almost immediately after the Exact put the settlers ashore,

for example, Indians came to live with them. Arthur Denny recalled

the scene: 

Soon after we landed and began clearing the ground for our buildings 

they commenced to congregate, and continued coming until we had over 

a thousand in our midst, and most of them remained all winter. Some of

them built their houses very near to ours, even on the ground we had

cleared, and although they seemed very friendly toward us we did not feel

safe in objecting to their building thus near to us for fear of offending them,

and it was very noticeable that they regarded their proximity to us as a pro-

tection against other Indians.

Denny’s account paints a radically different picture from Lillian Smart’s

creation story diorama. Instead of twenty-four settlers on an empty

beach, with perhaps a handful of Indians on hand, we see those same

twenty-four whites as pale faces among hundreds of darker ones.

Denny’s account also speaks to the reasons Native people came to New

York–Alki—out of curiosity, to trade, or in fear of increasingly com-

mon raids from northern Indians. Regardless of the reasons, by a few

weeks after the founding, New York–Alki was no longer just an Amer-

ican settlement. It was also an indigenous one.23

Arthur Denny and the others should not have been surprised.

Although they had had only one direct interaction with Indians on the

overland journey, a furtive skirmish with some Shoshoni men on the

Snake River, other experiences farther west made it clear that city found-

ing in the Northwest would include Indians. The early growth of Port-

land, for example (“quite a thriving town . . . even at that early period”

in Arthur Denny’s own words), was fueled largely by its new sawmill.

When the mill opened in 1850 on the bank of the Willamette, local indige-

nous people established a new settlement adjacent to it within weeks,

where they made up a significant portion of Portland’s population and

the mill’s labor force. Similarly, the “embryo city” of Olympia at the head

of Puget Sound consisted of “about a dozen one-story frame cabins,

T E R R A  M I S C O G N I TA /  3 3



covered with split cedar siding, well-ventilated and healthy, and perhaps

twice as many Indian huts near the custom house” when David Denny

and John Low met Lee Terry there.24

Within a few weeks of its founding, New York–Alki looked much

the same. It was a biracial place. To use the language of the day, it was

a place of Bostons and Siwashes, the former a reference to the city of

origin of many of the first Americans on Puget Sound and the latter a

derogatory term derived from the French word sauvage. With little expe-

rience other than tales of war, the settlers were forced to amend their

ambitions in light of their new, and seemingly precarious, circumstances.

Likewise, indigenous people who had left for Prairie Point but who had

arrived in New York–Alki had to come to terms with the new rules of

engagement represented by white settlement. Facing each other across

linguistic and cultural chasms, the indigenous and white residents of

Prairie Point/New York–Alki mystified each other. Native practices were

often inexplicable to the settlers: despite complaints from one of the

settler wives, for example, one elderly indigenous woman insisted on

throwing her used tea leaves at table legs whenever she visited the cab-

ins. Meanwhile, settler children caught herding garter snakes into a

brush fire were sharply admonished by Indian neighbors, who said it

would bring a flood. (Soon after, according to a Denny descendant’s own

account, there was in fact a downpour.) Indigenous men and women

found the newcomers, and in particular the Boston women, equally

strange. They crowded into the crude cabins to watch the women cook

and clean; several memoirs tell of Mary Denny and Lydia Low enlist-

ing harsh words or a hot skillet to maintain some semblance of privacy.

During those first few weeks, Americans and Indians each made attempts

to reach across divides of language, belief, and etiquette.25

Sometimes, it worked. When some laundry disappeared soon after

the setters arrived, Arthur Denny spoke to Seeathl, who admonished

the other Indians present and oversaw the swift return of the missing

garments. On another occasion, one of the white women fed a sick

indigenous child, whose father, a “hard case” dubbed Old Alki John,

gave her a tin pail in return. Although she refused his gift—more likely

an actual payment, and her refusal thus a minor affront to Native ideals

3 4



of reciprocity—the two families had nonetheless established a bond.

Also during that first winter, a woman named Ooyathl, one of the wives

of Seeathl, died suddenly. David and Arthur Denny built a cedar coffin

for her body, which was “wrapped . . . in so many blankets that it would

not go in.” Helping give Ooyathl the high-class burial her status

demanded helps explain the close connections between the Denny fam-

ilies and the families of Seeathl in decades to come, with David Denny

a particular favorite of many Native people in and around Seattle.26

But attempts at accommodation did not mean there were no tensions.

The male members of Denny Party in particular saw themselves as the

intellectual and moral leaders of New York–Alki, no matter the num-

ber of their indigenous neighbors. During that first winter, they made

it clear that a new political order, with them at the top, was emerging at

Prairie Point. When a “very white” Indian woman named Seeayay came

to the settlement to escape an abusive husband on the Puyallup River

to the south, David Denny advocated on her behalf. She later married

the son of Old Alki John (just plain Alki John), and as a result, David

Denny became known as the “Law-Man” among local indigenous com-

munities. Meanwhile, when an altercation between Indians visiting from

the Green River and the Cascade foothills threatened to turn violent,

Arthur Denny stepped in and kept them apart until tempers died down.

(While the indigenous disputants likely saw him as an impartial out-

side moderator, in keeping with local legal tradition, Denny surely inter-

preted their acquiescence as a sign that the Indians sought order—in

particular, his order.) Other performances of white authority were less

subtle. When the Vincennes, the same ship that had been part of

Wilkes’s expedition, arrived at New York–Alki during that first winter,

it repeatedly fired cannon that had once been used in a massacre in the

South Pacific. The booming reports made “a strong and respectful

impression upon the hundreds of Indians . . . while to the settlers, notic-

ing the effect upon the Indians, it was music of a delightful character.”

During the same months that an American minority learned to live

among an indigenous majority, that minority made it clear who planned

to be in charge in the years ahead.27

At the same time, indigenous people exerted their own influences

T E R R A  M I S C O G N I TA /  3 5



over the urban beginnings of New York–Alki. When the brig Leonesa

arrived, exchanging staples like flour and sugar for wooden piles to help

build San Francisco, it was Native men who cut most of the trees and

floated the lumber out to the ship. Indians also brought bushel after

bushel of potatoes to the settlement as supplies ran low during the win-

ter, gathering them from gardens in their own towns. And just as the

name New York was followed by a Chinook Jargon suffix, the first com-

mercial venture in the settlement, set up by John Low and Charles Terry

in November, had a name drawn from the hybrid trade language. The

New York Markook House (markook or makook meaning “trade”) kept

“constantly on hand and for sale at the lowest prices all kinds of mer-

chandise usually required in a new country.” Indeed, New York–Alki

was a new country, for Native and settler alike.28

D
espite the symbolism of events like Ooyathl’s burial and 

the firing of the ship’s cannon, both intended to make lasting

(if conflicting) impressions upon local Indians, the found-

ing of New York–Alki does not register prominently in the

oral tradition of local Native peoples. In fact, it does not register at all.

Among the many indigenous accounts of nineteenth-century history

in central Puget Sound, there are virtually no stories about the Denny

Party and the little settlement on the point. Clearly, what is so impor-

tant to Seattle’s civic place-story is much less so in Indian country. Per-

haps the landing at Alki was just one more arrival of settlers during a

period when similar foundings were taking place on the shores of Salt

Water; perhaps it is overshadowed by other events of the 1850s: the

treaties and the resulting conflict that settlers would name an “Indian

War.” And of course, not all stories survive. Nor do their keepers.

But perhaps the most obvious reason that the Alki landing is not

part of local indigenous oral tradition is because the settlement of New

York–Alki was a temporary arrangement. And so in the late winter of

1852, Arthur Denny, Carson Boren, and William Bell set out to cir-

cumnavigate Elliott Bay in search of a permanent location for their home-

steads. Since selling piles and timbers to passing ships was “the only

dependence for support in the beginning” as far as Denny could see,

3 6



“it was important to look well to the facilities for the business.” The

new site had to meet four requirements: a deep harbor, a supply of

freshwater, fine stands of timber close to the shore, and feed for stock.

As the three men explored the shores of Elliott Bay, they circulated

through another arc of the landscape, but the indigenous places

around Elliott Bay were largely invisible—save one. One Denny

descendant described their arrival at the spot, using modern landmarks

to orient her readers:

In the afternoon as they paddled south, the explorers discovered that the

high bluff gradually dropped from a height of forty feet to the level of a little

tide stream with meadow grass on its banks, which we know as Yesler Way.

North of this was a knoll at the foot of Cherry Street. South of the stream 

was a low wooded section, and half hidden therein were the ruins of an

Indian hut. The distinct shore line ended rather abruptly and merged into

tide flats at what is now the foot of King Street, making a point at low tide

and an island at high tide.

The three men decided that this place, known as Little Crossing-Over

Place to Seeathl and his people because of a trail leading into the back-

country, was to be their new home.29

Soon, it would become Seattle. On 23 May 1853, plats for the town

of Seattle were officially filed. By then, the settlement had grown into

a small hamlet, including figures like Henry Yesler and David “Doc”

Maynard who would become key players in Seattle’s urban drama.

Although the Whulshootseed name for the site was now familiar to many

of the settlers, the “awkward and meaningless” word meaning Little

Crossing-Over Place was never considered as a name for the town, while

Duwamps and Duwamish River, two other options used briefly during

1852, were considered ugly and unflattering.30 Instead, the community

leaders chose to name their town after Seeathl, who had played such a

vital role in life at New York–Alki. Historians have debated Seeathl’s reac-

tion to this; some say that he was indifferent, others that he was horrified

by the decision and even went to Olympia to protest it, and still more

suggest that he may have given the name willingly as he approached

T E R R A  M I S C O G N I TA /  3 7



the end of his life. Regardless of what he thought, the naming of Seat-

tle is typically portrayed in civic historiography as a critical turning point:

a handing over from the indigenous to the urban.31

Indeed, well before the day when Bell, Boren, and Denny decided

that Little Crossing-Over Place would be their new home, the indige-

nous world of the Duwamish, Lakes, and Shilsholes had been irrevo-

cably transformed. The ruined longhouse at Little Crossing-Over Place,

overgrown with wild roses (and, according to oral tradition, only one

of several that had once stood there), spoke to the abandonment of towns

in the wake of epidemics and slave raids. In Whulshootseed, similar

words described both houses and human bodies: house posts were limbs,

roof beams were spines, walls were skin. Just as sweeping a house and

healing a body could be expressed with the same verb, related words

spoke of illness and the falling down of a home, and so the ruins were

testaments to loss. Meanwhile, on a nearby bluff above Elliott Bay at

what is now Spring Street, a cemetery adorned with tin and trade beads

spoke of the epidemics and the traders who had brought them. Read

like a text, the landscape seemed to tell of the passing of Indians from

Puget Sound, and so the naming of Seattle seems the end of an era.32

But, of course, the story is much more complicated than that. When

the plat for Seattle was filed in May 1853, it showed a grid of straight

lines not unlike the layout of Abingdon or one of the other towns from

which the Bostons had come. On the ground, however, the landscape

would not be easily transformed into a model of Cartesian harmony.

Arthur Denny could attest to that. “The front of our territory was so

rough and broken as to render it almost uninhabitable at that early time,”

he recalled. “I dug a well forty feet deep in the bottom of the gulch and

only got quick sand with a very limited amount of water. Direct com-

munication with the bay, by which we received all our supplies at that

time, was next to impossible, owing to the height of the bluff.” Terra

miscognita, in the form of gullies and springs, sand and slopes, would

exert its own agency over Seattle’s growth, forcing urban visions to accom-

modate local realities.33

So would the people of Little Crossing-Over Place and Herring’s House

and Clear Water and all the other Native towns. Just as Vancouver’s Puget

3 8



Sound had not erased Salt Water, just as Wilkes’s Point Roberts and the

Denny Party’s New York–Alki had only partially obscured Prairie Point,

Seattle would not entirely replace Little Crossing-Over Place. In naming

settlements like Seattle, Europeans and Americans sought to claim them

and turn the abstract spaces of wilderness into places—into Home. But

such efforts were never completely successful. Instead, the day-to-day

realities of settlers and Natives meant that the newcomers would have

to contend with the people and places they sought to replace. Rather

than being emptied of their meanings, places in and around the young

town would collect new meanings as settlers accreted their own expe-

riences onto sites with existing indigenous histories. For Seattle, that

meant that the coming years would be a time of gathering—of new

stories about place, about race, and about the boundaries between coop-

eration and conflict. Seattle’s urban Indian history was just beginning.

T E R R A  M I S C O G N I TA /  3 9


























3 / Seattle Illahee

I
n 1858, hearing that indigenous people had been trading gold at

forts on the Fraser River north of Puget Sound, hopeful hundreds

ventured into the Fraser’s deep canyons, home to the Stó:lO and Nla-
ka’pamux peoples, in search of the yellow metal. Within a year, more

than twenty thousand prospectors, many of them American, had over-

run the Fraser. Unattached women were few and far between in the dig-

gings, and life there was a heady mix of longing and libido. Folk songs

on the Fraser included a randy little ditty about a place on Puget Sound

known for its good food and good women. Sung in a mixture of English

and Chinook Jargon, it painted a vivid, if vulgar, picture of Seattle’s

attractions:

There’ll be mowitch [venison]

And klootchman [Indian women] by the way

When we ’rive at Seattle Illahee [Seattle country].

There’ll be hiyu [many] clams

And klootchman by the way

Hiyu tenas moosum [Many “little sleeps” (sex)]

Till daylight fades away.

Kwonesum kwonesum cooley [Always always run]

Kopa nika illahee [To that place]

Kunamokst kapswalla moosum [To steal sleep together]

As the daylight fades away.

Row, boys, row!

Let’s travel to the place they call Seattle

(That’s the place to have a spree!)

Seattle Illahee!1

4 0



While magazines and newspapers enticed overlanders to Puget Sound

with stories of arable land and a salubrious climate, “Seattle Illahee”

was another kind of public relations altogether, and likely did as much

to establish Seattle’s reputation throughout the Northwest as any emi-

grant handbook.

That the miners sang of Seattle Illahee is fitting. On a literal level,

it was the name of one of the town’s primary economic ventures: the

Illahee was a brothel staffed mostly by Native women, many of them

most likely from British Columbia. On a more symbolic level, however,

illahee, a Chinook Jargon term meaning “country” or “place” or “home,”

suggested a truth about everyday life in early Seattle: it was as much

an indigenous place as a settler one. David Kellogg, who arrived in Seat-

tle in the 1850s, could have told you that. Decades later, he described

early Seattle as “a very small village, really more Indian than White!”

It was a place where Indians dominated the young urban landscape.

“Along the beach stretched the shanties with the inevitable canoes,” wrote

Kellogg, “some hauled high onto the beach and covered with mats while

the smaller ones lay idly at the water’s edge, ready for immediate use.

Every polackly [night] the singing and pounding in the shanties was

the mighty orison.”2

During its “village period,” an era stretching from the Denny

Party’s move to Little Crossing-Over Place in 1852 to the coming of

the railroad in 1883, Seattle was indeed a Native place. Indigenous

people came to town throughout those decades both to continue long-

standing traditions and to make bids for inclusion in urban life. Per-

haps most importantly, they came to work, and Indian labor would

facilitate much of Seattle’s early development. It would also challenge

federal Indian policy, as civic leaders enacted Indian policies of their

own that often ran counter to the ambitions of a weak national gov-

ernment. Well after the treaties and the “Indian War” that would erupt

between some settlers and some Native people in 1855 and 1856, the

presence of Native people in town continued to shape civic politics,

as Indians became signifiers of urban disorder in the eyes of many of

Seattle’s leading citizens. Seattle Illahee was a perfect name for a place

where indigenous people—both as participants in the town’s successes

S E AT T L E  I L L A H E E  /  4 1



and as scapegoats for its problems—were at the core of life on the urban

frontier. 

W
hen new settlers arrived in the little mill town

on Elliott Bay, they were often shocked by the large num-

bers of Duwamish, Lake, and Shilshole people in and

around Seattle. Alonzo Russell came in 1853 and recalled

years later that “like any boy of fourteen my first impressions of Seat-

tle were of the Thousands of Indians standing by.” Caroline Leighton,

the wife of an early customs collector, came in 1866, and in a florid

diary entry from April of that year wrote “the frogs have begun to sing

in the marsh, and the Indians in their camps. How well their voices

chime together.” She also described a small stream of freshwater that

cascaded down a gully into the lagoon at Seattle. Once, that stream had

been a water source for the longhouses of Little Crossing-Over Place.

Fifteen years later, the stream still served Native people, as they came

to town and replaced Little Crossing-Over Place with a bustling new

community that existed alongside, and enmeshed with, the Bostons.

Only a “small and insignificant village” in the eyes of 1859 arrival Dil-

lis Ward, Seattle was dominated by indigenous people, who made it their

own, using the new proto-urban venue, with its connections to new trade

networks, new forms of political and spiritual power, and new audiences,

to enact and even enhance economic, political, religious, and social tra-

ditions. Continuous streams of both water and history flowed here.3

All around the fledgling town, Indian people insisted on inclusion

in settler society. When a wedding united the Mapel and Van Asselt

families in 1862, Seeathl and several hundred of his people arrived to

observe the festivities along the Duwamish River. After dinner, the new-

lyweds stood on display while Native men and women filed by to look

at them. Afterward, Seeathl and others began a celebration of their own

on a sandspit at the mouth of the Duwamish, and Mapel recalled that

“all that was good in the power of the spirits was called upon and invoked

as a blessing for Henry Van Asselt.” More than simply the marriage of

two settlers, the wedding was a meeting of two cultures, with both mak-

ing a performance out of it. In allowing the Indians to gaze “in awe”

4 2



at the “white Klootchman,” the settlers defined themselves as superior

newcomers in a land of primitives. Meanwhile, in their finery and solem-

nity, Seeathl and his retinue similarly defined themselves as high-class

people. And the Mapel–Van Asselt wedding was not unusual; indige-

nous ceremony was a key element of Seattle’s urban scene during its

first decades, linking Native tradition with new circumstances. Caro-

line Leighton described a gathering to sing and dance spirit powers on

the Seattle shoreline in 1866: 

A little, gray old woman appeared yesterday morning at our door, with her

cheeks all aglow, as if her young blood had returned. Besides the vermilion

lavishly displayed on her face, the crease at the parting of her hair was painted

the same color. Every article of clothing she had on was bright and new. I

looked out, and saw that no Indian had on any thing but red. Even old blind

Charley, whom we had never seen in any thing but a black blanket, appeared

in a new one of scarlet.

This example of Native people maintaining traditional cultural prac-

tices in the new setting of a mill town is a powerful challenge to the

notion that Seattle’s Indian history was coming to a close. When half

the town showed up dressed in red, it was clear that Seattle was still a

good deal indigenous.4

But if some indigenous people pursued traditional ceremonies in

town, others came to Seattle to access the new spirit power that lived

there: Jesus Christ. One Native woman named Sally, said to be a sister

of Seeathl, was well known around town for her church attendance and

in fact strove to build friendships only with churchgoing white women.

Meanwhile, Ben Solomon, born at Little Crossing-Over Place before the

longhouses were abandoned and the wild roses took over, became a

figure in the local Roman Catholic congregation and after his first com-

munion built a chapel near the large Native towns on the Black River

south of Seattle.5

Weddings and other ceremonies offered venues for cultural encounter

in Seattle, but all too often the collision of indigenous religious obser-

vance with the norms of settler society highlighted the differences

S E AT T L E  I L L A H E E  /  4 3



between Seattle’s two peoples. For many pioneers, Native ceremonies

in town created lasting and deeply unsettling memories. David Kellogg

recalled vividly the year 1862, for example, when he heard that a “Klale

Tomaniwous”—a Chinook Jargon term that Bostons typically translated

as “black magic”—was going to take place along the waterfront. Arriv-

ing at a small house made of cedar-bark mats and lumber from Henry

Yesler’s sawmill, Kellogg witnessed the initiation of a man known as

Bunty Charley; “the pounding against the roof with poles and on the

circle of stones around the fire was deafening,” Kellogg recalled. The

proceedings soon moved outside, with participants tossing Charley’s

rigid body into the air and spraying it with mouthfuls of what appeared

to be blood. Soon after, Charley began behaving like the Bear power

that had possessed him, walking on all fours among the driftwood before

shambling off toward the river. The next morning, he was seen in town

wearing the badge of his new status: a dusting of white duck down on

his head and shoulders. This was a traditional initiation into a secret

society, and its staging on the Seattle waterfront was in keeping with

the ritual’s logic. Such practices were not just religious rituals but social

performances, designed specifically to shock and impress observers

and to cement the status of the secret society’s members. It certainly

worked in Kellogg’s case. “Holy smoke but it was a sight,” he wrote years

later, his shock still resonating decades later.6

The ducks that provided Bunty Charley’s dusting of down likely came

from the Duwamish River’s estuary, which had been the source of other

such emblems of status for centuries. But like new kinds of spiritual

power, novel objects that could express social standing—old blind

Charley’s scarlet blanket, for example—could now also be procured in

Seattle. Indian people visited Louisa Boren Denny to buy strips of silk

cut from old dresses, and she reminisced that the men in particular

“looked very fine with them around their waists, knotted at the side.”

Meanwhile, Native women made use of that most cherished of pioneer

symbols, the patchwork quilt, to highlight the status of their menfolk.

Another Denny kinswoman described how the Indians’ quilts of blue

and pink on white groundwork were made into shirts, and how “when

dressed in a pair of blue trousers and with a bright red scarf tied around

4 4



his waist and a gaudy red bandanna handkerchief . . . around his head,

his feet encased in bead-embroidered moccasins, a siwash was a ‘hy-

as tyee’ (very fine chief ).” Indigenous women were also regular patrons

at C. C. Terry’s store, where they bought tin cups to beat into ornaments,

and it was not uncommon to see them dressed in hoopskirts and car-

rying parasols. As commerce with places like San Francisco grew in

the 1850s and 1860s, such consumer goods provided yet another rea-

son for indigenous people to visit. Along with dentalium-shell chokers

and blankets woven from mountain-goat wool, now hoopskirts and para-

sols purchased in town could reflect their owners’ prestige.7

Prestige and power could also be found in meetings of the mind

between settler and Native leaders. In the 1850s, for example, Saneewa,

a Snoqualmie headman from an important indigenous town at the foot

of the Cascades, came every autumn with his family, his ponies, and

his dogs to camp in Arthur Denny’s pasture. Like Seeathl, Saneewa saw

Denny, arguably the most powerful man in town, as a strategic ally, but

the relationship was mutually beneficial. As the leader of a commu-

nity located at the western entrance to the lowest pass across the cen-

tral Cascades, which Denny coveted for a wagon road, Saneewa provided

crucial information about the route through the mountains. A few years

later, Denny would be among the surveyors to map what they called

Snoqualmie Pass. And as for Saneewa, many of his people and their

descendants were able to remain in the valley where they had always

lived, rather than removing to reservations, in part because of the rela-

tionships they built with settler “headmen” like Denny. Here, urban and

indigenous ambitions coincided, with trips to town reinforcing one

Native leader’s territorial prerogatives while also facilitating the open-

ing of new routes for American settlement of the region.8

Hoopskirts and duck down, ponies in pastures and wedding parties

near sandspits—each of these things highlighted the ways in which

settlers and Indians encountered each other as indigenous men and

women participated in town life during Seattle’s first decades. Social

status, religious observance, and political alliance were all part of the

urban indigenous frontier on Puget Sound and offered means for Native

men and women to participate in urban society. But throughout Seat-

S E AT T L E  I L L A H E E  /  4 5



tle’s village period, each of these reasons for coming to town was over-

shadowed by another: Indians came to Seattle (or, in some cases, never

left the place that became Seattle) for jobs. As they contributed to the

town’s economy, they would prove all too well that Seattle’s Indian his-

tory was nowhere close to ending. Indeed, indigenous people saw Seat-

tle as more than a settler community: it was their community, since

they had been partners in its creation. The question was what, if any-

thing, the Bostons, their civic leaders, and their federal government were

going to do about it.

I
n the early-morning hours of 26 January 1856, the U.S.

Navy’s sloop of war Decatur opened fire on the illahee called Seattle.

Its targets were not the fifty or so white residents huddling in a tiny

blockhouse at the corner of Front and Cherry; rather, the Decatur

was gunning for the estimated one thousand “hostiles” in the woods

behind town. They had come from indigenous communities in south-

ern Puget Sound and the far side of the Cascade Mountains to sack Seat-

tle, traveling down the old trail from Lake Washington to Little

Crossing-Over Place and taking up positions beyond the cleared yards

at the edge of town. They had already burned many outlying homesteads

and now seemed about to raze what little existed of central Puget Sound’s

urban potential. Throughout the day, settlers and marines exchanged

fire with the attackers, and by ten o’clock that evening, the enemy had

retreated back to Lake Washington. No bodies were ever found, but some

settlers estimated that as many as two hundred Native warriors had died;

among the settlers, one man and a teenage boy had been killed. In less

than twenty-four hours, the “Battle of Seattle” was over.9

Enshrined in local mythology as the ur-travail of early Seattle—a vio-

lent inverse of the Chief Seattle Speech—the Battle of Seattle is like

countless other events held to have occurred in what historian Patricia

Nelson Limerick has called the “empire of innocence,” in which blame-

less white pioneers earn honor and success by surviving threats from

nature, Indians, or a corrupt government. But what on its surface might

seem like a showdown between savagery and urbanity was in reality a

much messier affair, illustrated by a map of the conflict drawn by the

4 6



Decatur’s Colonel George S. Phelps. It shows a handful of streets and

landmarks such as the blockhouse and the hotel belonging to Mary

Ann “Mother Damnable” Conklin; above and to the right are the “hills

and woods thronged with Indians.” But at the edges of the little town,

we also see two clusters of cross-hatchings—almost like Plains tipis—

representing Indian encampments. On the slope above Henry Yesler’s

mill sits “Curley’s Camp,” and the other, named “Tecumseh’s Camp,”

stands across a dirt street from Mother Damnable’s. Distinguished from

the Native attackers, these were indigenous people who had come to

Seattle, but not to destroy it. Many of them had come to build it.10

Let there be no mistake: without the labor of Indians, Seattle would

have been stillborn. As lumbermen and laundresses, hunters and

haulers, indigenous men and women made the city possible. But at the

same time, their presence also brought the needs of an “embryonic town”

into conflict with the larger aims of federal policies designed to segre-

gate and manage Native communities. Civic leaders challenged the

remote federal government and created a local Indian policy based on

the needs of urban communities like Seattle and predicated upon a weak

federal presence in the region. Not everyone felt that “Siwashes”

belonged in town, though, and a series of legal restrictions placed on

indigenous people reflected settlers’ deep ambivalence about the place

of Indians in urban life. As at Alki Point that first winter, the presence

and persistence of Indians simultaneously facilitated and challenged

Seattle’s urban ambitions.

Seattle’s indigenous workers included the men employed at Henry

Yesler’s sawmill, the primary engine of commercial development for

the first two decades of the town’s existence. In the early 1850s, nearly

every white man in town worked in the mill, but its output of some

eight thousand board feet of lumber on a good day required the addi-

tional labor of Native men. Edith Redfield, an early settler, described

sawmills like Yesler’s as “little kingdoms, a law unto themselves . . . here

white men, Indians, Chinamen, and Kanakas [indigenous Hawai‘ians]

worked side by side and boarded at the Company’s cook-house.” Indi-

ans and settlers may have worked and boarded together, but Natives

also had particular contributions to make. John M. Swan recalled how

S E AT T L E  I L L A H E E  /  4 7



indigenous men, seasoned by regular bathing in the Sound, were well

suited for rafting lumber out to arriving ships. Remembering the load-

ing of the Orbit for the San Francisco market, for example, Swan recalled

that “several of us that were looking at them were shivering with the

cold.” Indian mill workers were especially crucial during the Fraser River

gold rush, when, in the words of settler William Ballou, “workmen could

not be hired for love nor money on Puget Sound” as settlers hied off to

the diggings. And as Indians carted sawdust away from Yesler’s mill,

they dumped it along the shoreline, filling the lagoon of Little Cross-

ing-Over Place and destroying the flounder fishery for which it had been

known. Indigenous labor, then, obliterated an indigenous place.11

Mill work was only part of the contribution Indians made to Seat-

tle’s livelihood. With supplies hard to find or outrageously priced, set-

tlers depended on Native subsistence networks to survive. J. Thomas

Turner told historian Hubert Howe Bancroft a quarter century later that

whites in early Seattle “awaited upon the ebb and flow of the tides for

their principal food . . . we were largely dependent upon the Native inhab-

itants . . . for our potatoes and food products of forest and Sound.” Jane

Fenton Kelly, the daughter of a Duwamish Valley family, recalled that

Native people made domestic life possible among the marshes and dense

timber:

Mother would send us out to watch for a canoe and we would hail them and

give them a written order to the grocery man. He would fill it, and they would

bring it out to us. They charged twenty-five cents or “two-bits” as they called

it, for each article they brought, large or small. I can remember after we were

on the homestead one-half mile up the hill, an old Indian by the name of Jake

carried a five-gallon keg of New Orleans molasses to us and charged us but

twenty-five cents.

In this way, the duck nets and salmon-drying frames of Seattle’s indige-

nous geography fed its immigrant population. The arrangement

benefited Indians as well; hunters who brought mallards and other water-

fowl to white families were typically paid a quarter dollar for each bird.

These coins, along with pelts of bears and other animals, often changed

4 8



hands on “whiskey boats” that plied the Sound with cargoes of flour,

tobacco, beads, and liquor.12

Indigenous work went beyond mill labor and subsistence provision;

Indians participated in almost every aspect of the Seattle economy, suc-

cessful or otherwise. They packed hundreds of barrels of salmon for

David “Doc” Maynard in the fall of 1852, a venture abandoned after the

fish spoiled before arriving in San Francisco. They used traditional meth-

ods to render dogfish oil, the primary lubricant for sawmill equipment

in Puget Sound until the 1890s. Native men cleared land and helped

build homes on the slopes above Elliott Bay, and Native women did the

washing within those homes. Indians paddled the canoe that carried

the U.S. mail, and shoreline-hugging “Siwash buggies,” as canoes were

sometimes called, were often the only way to travel from one place to

another. And of course there were the women celebrated by the ditty

“Seattle Illahee.” We can now only imagine the mix of limited oppor-

tunities and male coercion that led those women and girls from

British Columbia or elsewhere to the Illahee, but their contributions

to the economy and reputation of Seattle easily rivaled those of Yesler’s

mill employees. With the exceptions of banking, American-style med-

icine, and a handful of other settler-dominated vocations, Indians made

Seattle work in the 1850s, and their efforts helped settlers distinguish

“good” Indians from “bad.” Walter Graham, whose Lake Washington

farm had burned during the Battle of Seattle, nonetheless recalled that

the Indians he knew were “good workers” and that one had worked for

him for three years.13

But if settlers and Indians forged everyday relationships through

work, tensions between indigenous people and the newcomers could

also flare into violence. Well before the attack on the town in January

1856, violence between Indians and whites had been a regular, and

deeply distressing, occurrence. One such case was that of an Indian

called Mesatchie (“Wicked” in Chinook Jargon) Jim, who killed his

Native wife near Seattle in 1853. As punishment, Luther Collins and

several other settlers lynched Jim on Front Street. That lynching pre-

cipitated the slaying of a white man named McCormick near Lake

Union; in return, two more Native men were hanged in town. Such

S E AT T L E  I L L A H E E  /  4 9



spirals of violence took place when indigenous notions of justice, which

often mandated retaliation, coincided with a powerful strain of vigi-

lantism in settler society. That same year, preacher’s wife Catherine

Blaine recorded a similar cycle of killings that took the lives of two white

men and as many as a dozen Indian men, inspiring settlers to organ-

ize a militia to take care of the “problem” Natives. Had cooler heads

not prevailed, the militia’s offensive against indigenous people would

have taken place, not out in the woods or on a river somewhere, but

right in the heart of town where the Indians in question were staying.

“We feel considerably alarmed for ourselves,” the consistently timor-

ous Mrs. Blaine wrote, and her anxiety reflected that of many of her

neighbors, Boston and Native alike.14

Compared with the attempts at understanding that had taken place

at Alki Point only a few years earlier, these events illustrate just how

dry the tinder was as more settlers moved in on indigenous lands near

Seattle. And, in fact, many settlers did connect white emigration to vio-

lence, if only to blame each other. Recalling the Mesatchie Jim case,

for example, mill owner Henry Yesler described the effects of “lower

class” emigrants on Indian-white relations, noting that “whenever

there was trouble it was the fault of some worthless white man.” In

what would become one of the most important patterns of conflict in

Seattle in the coming decades, Yesler identified class as a key element

of race relations. Tensions between the “law and order crowd,” repre-

sented by Yesler, Arthur Denny, and other civic leaders, and the “worth-

less,” less orderly elements of urban society would shape life in Seattle

for years to come. While Yesler blamed interracial violence on the wrong

kind of emigrants, many indigenous people knew that low-class set-

tlers were only part of the problem.15

And so within just a few short years of Seattle’s founding, both set-

tlers and Natives were calling for a new sort of order. That new order

came in the form of treaties designed to mitigate interracial violence

by creating new boundaries between white and Indian communities

and settling—pun intended—the question of indigenous title to the land.

Much of the run-up to the signings took place in urban outposts. Seat-

tle was the site of one such proceeding on 12 January 1854, when Isaac

5 0



Ingalls Stevens, the new territorial governor and Indian superintend-

ent, introduced himself and the treaty process to more than a thousand

Indians and some ten dozen settlers gathered in front of Doc Maynard’s

office. One year, ten days, and many speeches later, Seeathl and other

headmen signed the Treaty of Point Elliott.16

In towns throughout Puget Sound, settlers celebrated the treaty

process; one Native elder, in a particularly eloquent choice of words,

described Seattle settlers’ reaction to the treaty as “hooraying.” There

was some cause for optimism among Indians as well. Among other

things, the treaty ensured that indigenous people would have the right

to camp, hunt, fish, and harvest berries and roots at the “usual and accus-

tomed stations and grounds.” But despite the promises of the treaty,

few Indians were hooraying. In fact, significant factions in Native com-

munities on Salt Water and beyond took offense at the treaty agreements,

and some did not hesitate to express their indignation. In late 1855, for

example, a shaman named Chaoosh visited David and Louisa Denny

at their cabin on Lake Union after a government “potlatch” at Tulalip

north of Seattle. Enraged at the agent’s offers of cheap needles and strips

of blankets, he warned them that whites were few in number and could

be easily wiped out. The condescending gifts, paltry compared to what

could be found in any town’s shops, only added to growing Native out-

rage at the hubris of the Bostons.17

As tensions grew, urban settlements, beachheads of the American

invasion of Puget Sound, were obvious targets for the indigenous upris-

ing that seemed increasingly inevitable. In response, white officials

began with what seemed like the most obvious first step: removing Indi-

ans from the towns. Indian agent Michael T. Simmons, however, found

that doing so was no simple task. A month before the attack on Seat-

tle, after several attacks had already taken place elsewhere in the region,

Simmons reported finding among Seattle’s indigenous residents “a

strong determination . . . not to cross over to their reservation. . . . I

informed them that they must go over or they should receive nothing.

Finally they obeyed my wishes and those of the head chief.” Removal,

however, could not only not prevent war but might actually lead to it;

Henry Yesler and several other Seattleites, for example, warned that forc-

S E AT T L E  I L L A H E E  /  5 1



ing Indians onto the reservations “was to all appearance tantamount

to a declaration of war against them.”18

But many did not leave, and, in fact, when the Battle of Seattle finally

came, it was Indians who saved the day and the settlement. On the eve

of the conflict, several hundred Native people remained in and imme-

diately around the town, including Curley, who had close connections

both with Henry Yesler and with Leschay (Leschi), a Nisqually militant

who was allegedly organizing the attack. Curley met with Leschay to

call for peace, but the warrior would not be swayed. And so, along with

several other Duwamish people and a number of white men who lived

with Indian women, Curley brought warning of the attack to the set-

tlers, giving them just enough time to make haste to the tiny blockhouse.

Connections between settlers and Native people, forged through every-

day life, had saved Seattle. (Leschay would be hanged in 1858 for the

murder of an American soldier, a highly controversial punishment that

divided settler opinion and ultimately resulted in Leschay’s unofficial

exoneration in 2004.)19

Despite the role that “friendlies” had played in mitigating the attack

by “hostiles” on Seattle, once the smoke had cleared, settler leaders

quickly labeled all Indians potentially dangerous and renewed their

efforts to get Indian people out of town. For settlers unfamiliar with the

complicated alliances and enmities that linked indigenous communi-

ties in Puget Sound, segregation seemed the way to proceed, especially

with territorial newspapers warning that “the savage war-whoop, as it

were, [is] at the doors of every town and settlement within our borders.”

But it was as difficult a task now as before the attack. In July 1856, for

example, Henry Yesler, now Indian agent for the Seattle area, reported

to Governor Stevens that a number of Native people were fishing, clam-

ming, and harvesting berries at Salmon Bay. Yesler also wrote of two

Indian families who were still in the “off-limits” area of Lake Washington

because one of their men, mortally wounded by a faulty musket,

wanted to die and be buried on his “illahee.” Meanwhile, George Paige,

another Indian agent, complained that Doc Maynard had been treat-

ing Native people like Seeathl’s churchgoing sister Sally and filling pre-

scriptions for them without first applying to Paige for authorization.

5 2



Their faith in traditional medicine shaken by epidemics, some indige-

nous people saw visiting American doctors as a way to stay alive. (That

is, if they could get past Duwamish Valley settler Luther Collins, who

shot at Seattle-bound Indians so often that it merited a letter of com-

plaint from one naval commander to Governor Stevens.)20

Work remained the primary reason Native people stayed in town after

the attack, and Paige complained about this issue more than any other.

His threats to withhold government rations from Indians living in town

fell flat, as they were “mostly in the employ of whites, consequently etc.

do not require feeding.” The source of the problem, Paige wrote, was

the “intermedling” businessmen who needed workers; Doc Maynard

was particularly guilty of having “tampered” with the agent’s charges.

This was ironic, considering that Maynard had complained about the

very same issue only two months earlier when he briefly served as an

Indian agent. While overseeing the relocation of Seattle’s indigenous

residents to remote West Point in the late summer of 1856, Maynard

was confronted by Henry Yesler, who “wanted a portion of them to work

for him & it would cause him much trouble to go to the said encamp-

ment after them.” Enlisting the support of Arthur Denny and other town

leaders, Yesler convinced many of the Indians to stay put and encour-

aged others to come in from the Lake Washington backcountry. Those

who did follow Maynard’s orders, referred to by Yesler and Arthur Denny

as “fools,” struggled through a series of brutal winter storms on the

exposed and isolated spit. The reservations were no better. In Novem-

ber 1856, an Army captain at the Muckleshoot Agency in the Cascade

foothills wrote to his superiors on behalf of Duwamish headman

William that “on the reservation, they were furnished with a little flour

daily by the Indian Agent, Page [sic], that they could get no clams there,

and the consequence was that many died of hunger, and unless a num-

ber had gone to their old ground to procure Salmon, they should all

have died on the reservation.” The point had been made: life in town

was better for Indians, just as Indians in Seattle were often better for

the town.21

By the end of 1856, it was clear that agents’ efforts to vacate indige-

nous settlements in and around Seattle had not worked. Four separate

S E AT T L E  I L L A H E E  /  5 3



bands of Native people remained in the Seattle vicinity at the end of

the year. One small group of thirty or so, under the leadership of a man

known to settlers as Cultus (“Worthless”) Charley, was camping just

north of town along the beach, and more than a hundred remained

directly across the bay at Herring’s House. Meanwhile, Curley’s band

of forty had settled in behind Mother Damnable’s in the heart of town.

And even Native people who had gone to the reservations would return,

if only seasonally; by midsummer of 1857, some three hundred Indi-

ans were camped at the mouth of the Duwamish River opposite Seat-

tle, likely at an ancient settlement and stockade called Little-Bit-Straight

Point.22

By not moving, Native people continued both to play a central role

in Seattle’s fledgling economy and to vex many of their non-Indian neigh-

bors, and the tensions between these two facts were expressed in a series

of policies enacted in Seattle during the 1860s. The first came in 1865,

when Seattle officially incorporated. Among the first ordinances passed

was one decreeing that “no Indian or Indians shall be permitted to reside,

or locate their residences on any street, highway, lane, or alley or any

vacant lot in the town of Seattle.” But it also demanded that “all per-

sons having in their employ any Indian or Indians within the corpo-

rate limits of said town shall provide lodgments or suitable residences

for the said Indians during the time of said employment, on, or imme-

diately attached to their own places of residence.” Signed by Charles

Terry, Ordinance No. 5 tried to codify a middle road between segrega-

tion and integration. Set alongside ordinances dealing with taxes, side-

walks, and magistrate fees, the “Removal of Indians” ordinance—which

was really only about the removal of certain kinds of Indians and the

retention of others—highlighted just how central Indians were to urban

life on Puget Sound.23

A second ambivalent document appeared a year later, in 1866, in

the form of a petition protesting a proposed reservation for Duwamish

Indians along the Black River south of Seattle, the “inside” place that

gave the Duwamish their name. Citing that the sixteen Native families

living there had been “justly and kindly protected” by the settlers, the

156 signatories—virtually every white man in King County—argued

5 4



that a reservation would be an “injury . . . to the quiet and flourishing

settlements along the Black and Duwamish rivers.” Moreover, it would

be “unnecessary to the aborigines and injurious to your constituents.”

Indigenous people working in town or living along the river were one

thing; for Arthur and David Denny, Henry Yesler, Doc Maynard, and

the other petitioners, the imposition of a reservation close to Seattle

was quite another. The settlers preferred their own system of manag-

ing Indian-white relations, and so the proposed reservation was never

established, an outcome that would have significant consequences for

Duwamish legal status decades later.24

The absence of a federal government capable of consistently enforc-

ing its own Indian policies, along with the necessity of Indian labor,

meant that the people of Seattle—settler and indigenous alike—had

to craft their own strategies for dealing with each other in the first years

of the town’s existence. Men like George Paige tried to enforce reser-

vation policy, while others like Henry Yesler actively thwarted it, and

still others like Doc Maynard seemed to change strategy depending on

their circumstances. Meanwhile, some indigenous people like Seeathl

went along with the treaties and left Seattle, while others like his sis-

ter Sally insisted on continuing to come to town. And still others such

as Leschay were driven by the American government’s proposals to try

to burn the settlers’ urban outpost to the ground.

In later years, it would be this last indigenous strategy that would

most commonly be used to explain why Seattle seemed to stall in the

years after the “Indian War.” Arthur Denny, for example, painted a bleak

picture of the Battle of Seattle’s long-term effects, noting that “those

who remained . . . were so discouraged, and so much in dread of another

outbreak, that they were unwilling to return to their homes in the coun-

try . . . as a consequence it was years before we recovered our lost

ground to any great extent.” Certainly, burned homesteads on the out-

skirts of town had frightened some settlers away, but other forces—the

Fraser River gold rush, an economic depression, the Civil War, and the

lack of a railroad—did more to retard Seattle’s growth during the 1850s

and 1860s than the brief indigenous uprising. And in fact, much of

the growth that did take place during those lean years was thanks to

S E AT T L E  I L L A H E E  /  5 5



Indian labor. In the form of logs shipped, fish caught, laundry washed,

and mail delivered, Native people had kept Seattle from becoming yet

another failed urban vision. But even as the “woods thronged with Indi-

ans” faded into clear-cuts and memories, indigenous people remained

a threat to many Bostons’ visions of urban destiny—if not from out-

side Seattle, then from within it.25

S
eattle made its television debut during the Vietnam

War, when Here Come the Brides first aired on 25 September

1968. With its theme song claiming “the bluest skies you’ve

ever seen are in Seattle,” Brides fictionalized one of Seattle’s

most beloved stories—the importation of dozens of white women to

Seattle during and just after the Civil War—for a national audience. It

was inspired by the story of Asa Shinn Mercer, twenty-five years old

and the newly elected president of the territorial university. Of all his

accomplishments, Mercer is most remembered as the entrepreneur

who brought eleven unmarried women to the men of Seattle in 1864.

Mostly Unitarians from the industrial town of Lowell, Massachusetts,

the women, who would come to be known as “Mercer Girls,” either mar-

ried white bachelors or became schoolteachers. Lauded for his effort,

Mercer brought a second installment, of thirty-four “girls,” in 1866.

Their story, fraught with just the right mix of adventure and romance,

has been part of Seattle’s place-story ever since. The 1960s television

version was a balm against the growing horror of televised war in South-

east Asia, and in the 1860s, the real Mercer Girls were a balm as well,

not against the horrors of that decade’s own terrible war, but against

something that seemed more immediately threatening to many settlers:

the mixed-race world of Seattle Illahee.26

When he went to the cities of the East seeking young women, Asa

Mercer went with a blessing in the form of a letter of recommendation

from William Pickering, Washington territorial governor. Both Mercer

and Pickering saw this as a missionary enterprise; in a circular dis-

tributed ahead of his visits, Mercer cautioned that “we only wish a class

of emigrants who will improve the religion, morals, and tone of soci-

ety in the T[erritory].” Mercer, and by proxy certain elements of Seat-

5 6



tle society, were not interested in recruiting the East’s urban rabble;

rather, they wanted upstanding young women who could serve as social

housekeepers, transferring the civilizing institutions of marriage and

education to the savage West. As women signed on, the travails ahead

worried many of their families; some wrote letters describing the “ignor-

ance, coarseness, and immorality” of Seattle and claiming that Wash-

ington Territory was “the last place in the world for women.” In a sense,

they were right: Seattle was a far cry from Lowell or New York. When

those first eleven women disembarked from the sloop Kidder on 16 May

1864, they joined an ongoing struggle to establish urban order, and not

surprisingly in Seattle Illahee, indigenous people were at the center of

the debate. What was at stake, at least in the minds of some Seattleites,

was the town’s very survival.27

As he traveled through New England and New York, Mercer described

the challenges American civilization faced in the Northwest. He was

particularly concerned about relations between white men and Indian

women, which purportedly threatened the moral tone of a place where,

according to one settler, “it required a combination of all the towns . . .

to muster enough white women to make up three of four sets at a dance.”

With those demographics, the companionship of Native women, like

the labor of Native people more generally, was part of everyday life in

Seattle and had been since the town’s beginning. The story of early Seat-

tle is the story of intimate encounters. “Indian Jennie,” a niece of Seeathl,

married African American settler John Garrison “according to the Indian

custom” in the 1850s, around the time that Matthew Bridges married

his Native wife, Mary, who had been born at Little Crossing-Over Place.

Rebecca FitzHenry was born in town to a white father and Duwamish

mother in 1862. Six years later, the Duwamish woman Kalaeetsa gave

birth to her son Charles, whose father was settler Michael Kelly. Mill

owner Henry Yesler recalled how many unmarried white men work-

ing in local sawmills had Native women as companions, and Yesler him-

self had fathered a child named Julia with the fifteen-year-old daughter

of Curley, despite the fact that his wife, Sarah, was still alive and well

and living in Ohio. Through these new relations, a whole generation

of mixed-race children called Seattle their illahee by the 1860s.28

S E AT T L E  I L L A H E E  /  5 7



For Asa Mercer and others, this was a dire problem in need of fixing.

Minister’s wife Catherine Blaine wrote home in 1853, for example, about

the doomed marriage of a settler named Joe Foster to Betsy, the grand-

daughter of Seeathl. Infamous for being “unkind” to his wife, Foster’s

behavior eventually led Betsy to hang herself in their small house in

town. Her Indian relatives demanded the body for burial, while Foster

pleaded with settlers to allow her to be interred in the town cemetery.

They acquiesced, but Blaine’s husband refused to officiate at the funeral,

which was attended only by a few “squaw men” and their Native com-

panions. “Now, what a situation he is in,” Catherine Blaine penned to

her kin back East, “with his little half-breed child and despised by whites

and hated by the Indians. . . . He is, I believe, the son of a minister and

well brought up.” Blaine’s portrayal of the Foster family’s tragedy is

telling. While clearly identifying Foster’s abuse as the proximal cause

of Betsy’s suicide, it also hinted at a deeper problem in the minds of

many Seattleites. On an urban frontier with few white women, settler

men could be “tempted” into liaisons with indigenous women, and even

a minister’s son could be dragged down into the chaos that misce-

genation brought. In another letter, Blaine bemoaned “the degradation

men bring on themselves” in Seattle through their relationships with

Native women, who were “but little better than hogs in human shape.”

The children of such unions were a problem as well in the eyes of some

Bostons; settler and historian Charles Prosch condemned mixed-race

couples for “giving birth to a class of vagabonds who promised to

become the most vicious and troublesome element in the population.”

The situation seemed to threaten the whole region; according to mis-

sionary Charles Huntington, race mixing cast a pall of “moral dark-

ness” over Puget Sound, against which the Mercer Girls shone as

beacons of light.29

Asa Mercer’s importation of white women was just one means of

rectifying the problem; the law was another. In 1855 the territorial leg-

islature had passed the Color Act, which voided solemnized marriages

between whites and Indians in Washington State. Three years later, that

law was amended to nullify all future interracial marriages as well, and

in 1866 the legislature would enact a new Marriage Act denying even

5 8



common-law legitimacy to indigenous-white relationships. Meanwhile,

Superintendent of Indian Affairs W. W. Miller published an editorial

in the Washington Standard in 1861 calling for an end to the “degrad-

ing” practice of “open prostitution and concubinage” between settlers

and Indians, which was “so utterly subversive of good order.” Reveal-

ing that there were also economic motives behind such a call for order,

the 1866 Legitimacy Act barred mixed-race children from inheriting

their father’s estate if children existed from a previous marriage to a

white woman. Unless white control of land and political power was pro-

tected by legislative means, many proponents of miscegenation laws

feared that thousands of acres would be handed down to a generation

of “mongrels” and that the “half-breed vote” would prove an embar-

rassment to ambitions toward statehood. (During his tenure in the ter-

ritorial legislature, for example, Arthur Denny himself would advocate

tirelessly against giving mixed-heritage people the vote.) For all their

scope and number, though, the laws were often difficult to enforce; his-

torian Charles Prosch complained that during the 1860s and 1870s it

was difficult to find jurors and attorneys who did not have Indian fam-

ily members and who were not therefore “in sympathy with the delin-

quents.” Just as the presence of Indians thwarted some settlers’ urban

visions, everyday life in Seattle Illahee resisted the “civilizing” efforts

of racist laws.30

As moralizers fretted and lawmakers legislated, life went on in Seat-

tle Illahee, including at the namesake Illahee itself. Opened in 1861 by

John Pinnell, who had previously run brothels on San Francisco’s Bar-

bary Coast, the Illahee appeared the same year that Superintendent

Miller’s miscegenation editorial appeared in the local press. It was one

of the largest buildings in Seattle, with a dance floor, a long bar, and

a series of private rooms. Described in the 1870 census as “Hurdy-

Gurdies,” the Indian women employed there (few if any of them from

local tribal communities) were also called “sawdust women” after the

Illahee’s location on the fill that had obliterated Little Crossing-Over Place

and its lagoon. One typically pious memoir described “bawdy houses”

and “squaw brothels” resounding with the “the frantic cries of those

whose sin had brought them to the verge of madness and despair,” sug-

S E AT T L E  I L L A H E E  /  5 9



gesting that such institutions were well known even to those who would

never consider darkening their doors.31

On the streets and alleys south of Mill Street, the mad houses (another

nickname for establishments like the Illahee), saloons, and gambling

parlors of Seattle were known collectively as the Lava Beds, a name with

both infernal and libidinal connotations. In Seattle’s new place-story,

the “sawdust women” were the antitheses to the “Mercer Girls,” and

the mad houses stood in opposition to the orderly world north of Mill

Street. Even the landscape reflected the difference: prim houses among

cleared woods on the hills versus shanties on the sopping tideflats. At

the same time, the Lava Beds fueled the urban economy, and despite

all their moral outrage, critics of the Illahee lived in a town whose growth

was driven by the engines of “moral darkness.” Asa Mercer, John Pin-

nell, and “their” women represented a kind of urban symbiosis; after

all, it was not far from one side of Mill Street to the other. 

Never mind symbiosis, though: to the enforcers of moral authority

in Seattle, the Lava Beds and the people who frequented them were

threats to urban order. For newspaper editors, Christian religious lead-

ers, and others, the presence of Indians in Seattle seemed to threaten

not just the town’s moral fiber but its very existence. Native people and

the settlers who “sided” with them—for this struggle was very definitely

perceived as having two sides—were portrayed as having the potential

to quite literally destroy Seattle. Two vectors of destruction, almost apoc-

alyptic in their scope, were of particular concern: disease and fire. In

the minds of many influential Seattleites, both contagion and conflagra-

tion had their origins—and scapegoats—in the town’s mad houses and

sawdust women. Long after the Battle of Seattle, it seemed that indige-

nous people could still sack the place. 

The earliest extant text printed in Seattle, dating from 1872, is a hand-

bill warning of an impending visitation by the dread smallpox, which

remained a potent reality in Puget Sound a century after its first terri-

ble appearance. This was especially true in the filthy, congested cities

Americans and Canadians had built. In the early 1860s, for example,

another wave of Comes Out All Over had traveled from town to town,

arriving in Seattle from San Francisco via Victoria, British Columbia.

6 0



As before, indigenous communities bore the brunt of the microbes,

which killed hundreds (if not thousands) of Indians in 1862 alone. Native

people were at a loss as to how to stop it. Settler Joseph Crow, for exam-

ple, recalled the unsuccessful efforts of a Native doctor to heal patients

in a house at Front and King Streets on the Lava Beds during an out-

break in 1864—after which the doctor, his skills now seen as useless,

disappeared. But if Indians were the primary victims of epidemics, they

were also the primary scapegoats. Between the lines of the handbill warn-

ing of disease lay powerful ideas about race, sex, and urban destiny.32

In January 1876, for instance, two Native women died of smallpox

in Seattle. What to us seems like a small outbreak inspired the Seattle

Daily Intelligencer to decry a much more pressing issue: the traffic in

“miserable prostitutes” by men like the “vile wretch” who had brought

the two women from Victoria. And so when a Native woman died of

smallpox in a building south of Mill Street and another was found to

be infected, the press placed the blame squarely on the residents of the

Lava Beds and their supposed moral failings: 

It is not generally deemed advisable to mention the presence of this loath-

some disease in a city, but we believe that to be . . . an injustice to the public,

who should be seasonably apprised of contagion in any quarter and thus 

be enabled to guard against it. Aside from this, we have another reason for

alluding to the subject, and that is to call immediate attention to the neces-

sity of our city authorities taking prompt steps to provide for the care of other

cases, which must occur from exposure to this, and to adopt some stringent

regulations relative to allowing any Indians from British Columbia and else-

where, to be landed at this port, or to visit or reside in this city. As yet noth-

ing has been done in the way of preventing these filthy animals from visiting

our city at will, and bringing . . . what may become a pestilence in our midst.

Adding “beastly squaws” and “filthy animals” to a racist lexicon already

inhabited by “sawdust women” and “squaw men,” the editorial also posed

a central question about urban progress: were Seattle’s legal and med-

ical establishments mature enough to deal with this crisis? Law enforce-

ment were still in its infancy and Bostons still regularly died during

S E AT T L E  I L L A H E E  /  6 1



epidemics; those facts, combined with still-fresh memories of vast mor-

tality among the Indians, put very real fear in the hearts of settlers. If

ecological imperialism—the introduction of new species like smallpox

to new worlds like Salt Water—had made Seattle’s founding possible,

the fear now was that it could unmake it as well.33

In response to this new outbreak, the city council ordered the mayor

to pass laws preventing the spread of contagion to other Seattleites. If

the official urban powers could not deal with the problem, the Daily

Intelligencer warned, other forces might be brought to bear. Concerned

citizens, the paper suggested, might, “regardless of our authorities so-

called, take the matter in their own hands and adopt that vigorous course

in the premises which is needed.” The heated rhetoric of the Daily Intel-

ligencer reflected the near hysteria that swept Seattle during smallpox

visitations. In March 1877, for example, some “evil disposed person”

raised the standard of contagion, a yellow flag, in the window of a ten-

ement on Mill Street. The paper described what happened next: “sev-

eral timid persons . . . plunged off the sidewalk into the mud, and shied

away like young fillies in their first hurdle.” Even a false alarm, as this

turned out to be, could disrupt town life.34

Meanwhile, real outbreaks continued. In May 1877, Mayor Gideon

Weed, a physician by training, received a report of smallpox at Salmon

Bay. He went to investigate and discovered that one Native woman had

already died. Her relatives had buried her, burned her clothing and bed-

ding, and then “quit the locality,” but Weed located them the next day

along the Duwamish and had them placed under armed guard in a “pest

house” on the ridge between Seattle and Lake Washington. Their fate

is lost to history, but the incident was a great boost to the reputation of

Mayor Weed, who was lauded in the press as having done “much more

than could even have been asked or expected of him in that official capac-

ity.” It also inspired a new policy: during smallpox outbreaks, the police

would prevent all Indians from entering Seattle “so far as is practica-

ble.” But quarantines and exclusion did not prevent Native communi-

ties from carrying more than their share of smallpox’s burden. In the

twelve months leading up to July 1877, for example, there were eight-

een cases of the disease in Seattle, twelve white and six Indian; nine of

6 2



the whites recovered while only one Indian did. More indigenous people

living in and around Seattle died in the next twelve months; the encamp-

ment at Smith’s Cove was hit particularly badly. Settlers discovered a

number of Indian bodies there, buried in shallow graves with their

broken guns. Not long after, the remains of a man identified as “the

son of Old Moses” were found jammed in a trunk north of town,

spurring another round of vaccinations among settlers who “may have

fooled around the tainted spot.” Although smallpox was heading into

decline as a major cause of mortality among both Indians and settlers,

it remained on many Bostons’ minds in the late 1870s as one of the gravest

dangers presented by indigenous people in the urban landscape.35

Smallpox was one danger; fire was another. In the nineteenth cen-

tury, fire was perhaps the ultimate urban fear: again and again, cities

throughout the industrializing world had experienced devastating fires

that often changed the course of their history in profound ways. In Seat-

tle Illahee, fears of fire combined with anxieties about Indians to spawn

a second apocalyptic discourse. In short, many settlers—and in par-

ticular, those in charge of the newspapers—were convinced that Native

people were going to burn the town down. One 1878 editorial, for exam-

ple, described the Lava Beds as a “tinder box, all primed and charged

as it were, and ready to explode without a moment’s warning in a whole-

sale conflagration.” After a “narrow escape” in September, the Daily Intel-

ligencer posited that “in time of peace it is best to prepare for war” and

called for the building of water tanks and the hiring of night watch-

men to patrol the Lava Beds and Indian camps. But for some, the best

way to deal with the fire danger was simply to get rid of the Native

encampments on the flats near Main Street. Not only were their inhab-

itants “an element too indecent to be tolerated within the city limits,”

said one editorial, but their bonfires threatened the “whole business

portion of town.” “There is also an old ‘siwash’ shanty situated further

down the reef, and near the old Pinnell house,” the article continued,

“which should be razed to the ground and occupants driven off to the

reservation where they belong.” The author then demanded that the

chief of police take responsibility for keeping Indians out of the city;

if he did not, the result was sure to be catastrophic. Once again, the

S E AT T L E  I L L A H E E  /  6 3



danger was not just material; it was also moral. Never mind that other

Native people lived in town as family members and employees; it was

these “threats” who warranted the most public attention and who

became an integral part of the young city’s new place-story.36

In the end, neither of the fires that swept Seattle—one in 1879 and

the “Great Fire” of 1889—had anything to do with Indians. The first

started in a middle-class hotel, and the second, which destroyed most

of the business district, began in a cabinetmaker’s shop. Other fires,

meanwhile, targeted Indian people. On the night of 7 May 1878, for

example, someone burned down the Illahee. The Daily Intelligencer cel-

ebrated the blaze, which “swept off a fusty obstruction to progressive

improvements in that quarter.” “Citizens and firemen stood about watch-

ing the fire,” one settler recalled, noting that “not a pint of water was

thrown upon the fire, nor an effort made to save any part or article.”

Throughout Puget Sound, laws and torches became weapons in the bat-

tle between two urban orders, one symbolized by the Mercer Girls and

the other by the Lava Beds. In the decades to come, two competing urban

visions—an “open town” that actively encouraged its red-light district

and a “closed town” with zero tolerance for vice—remained at the core

of Seattle politics. What would be forgotten in the future, though, was

that such debates had their roots in earlier conflicts over the role of Native

people in town life and over who belonged in this new place called

Seattle.37

S
ometime in the 1870s, a Chinese man named Ling Fu was

brought before Judge Cornelius Hanford in Seattle’s courthouse,

accused of not having the proper citizenship papers. Facing

deportation, Ling Fu argued that he did not need to carry

papers: he had been born on Puget Sound. To test him, Judge Hanford

quickly shifted his inquiry into Chinook Jargon, which had become

nearly as common as Whulshootseed or English in Puget Sound coun-

try. “Ikta mika nem? Consee cole mika?” (What is your name? How

old are you?), he demanded of Ling, who in turn replied, “Nika nem

Ling Fu, pe nika mox tahtlum pee quinum cole” (My name is Ling Fu,

and I am twenty-five years old). Clearly surprised, the judge responded,

6 4



“You are an American, sure, and you can stay here.” He then turned to

the bailiff and decreed, “Ling Fu is dismissed.”38

Ling Fu’s brief trial symbolizes the ways in which settlers—Boston,

Chinese, and others—had been transformed by their life in Seattle Illa-

hee. Accounts of Seattle’s “village period” are full of settlers speaking

Chinook Jargon and sometimes even Whulshootseed; of white men and

women learning indigenous subsistence practices from their Native

neighbors and employees; and of people from places like Illinois and

Ireland, Gloucester and Guangzhou, learning to accommodate Indians’

insistence on participation in urban life. Nearly thirty years after Seat-

tle’s founding, Native people were still in town, and their participation

in urban life had changed the Bostons as well. The mad house known

as the Illahee might have been destroyed, but the larger Seattle Illahee,

in which indigenous lives were woven into the urban fabric, remained,

even as Seattle stood perched on the brink of an urban revolution.

S E AT T L E  I L L A H E E  /  6 5


























4 / Mr. Glover’s Imbricated City

I
n the spring of 1878, the Seattle Daily Intelligencer announced

that a certain Mr. Glover, after making sketches the previous winter,

had completed a drawing of Seattle “supposed to be taken from a

considerable elevation.” According to the newspaper, the resulting

bird’s-eye view of the town was “at once a map and a picture,” portray-

ing “every street, public building and private residence . . . with extraor-

dinary accuracy.” Nearly three feet wide, the drawing included not just

the city but its surroundings, “Lakes Washington and Union basking

in the summer sunlight, and the Cascade range towering over all.” The

Daily Intelligencer also reported that Glover and his business partner

planned to embark on a campaign to print and distribute lithographs

of the panorama, to specific ends:

To those who subscribe liberally a very liberal allotment of pictures will be

made, and as they convey a truthful and accurate portrait of our city and 

harbor, they will prove invaluable to friends afar off anxious to know what

Seattle is like. To property owners the picture will also prove of the greatest

value for circulation amongst investors. There are hundreds of capitalists

who would be only too glad to know of so genial a clime and so many natural

advantages for a commercial city, and where they could invest their money 

in good paying railroads and real estate. The promoters of the view should

be encouraged to perfect their arrangements immediately, as the city never

needed the picture more than at the present time.

In an era of intense competition among young northwestern cities, Glov-

er’s portrait and its counterparts representing Port Townsend, Tacoma,

6 6



Portland, and other towns played critical roles in urban image making

and in the pursuit of immigration and investment.1

But panoramic city views from the nineteenth century usually bore

little resemblance to the actual places they marketed. Instead, in the

words of one urban historian, they “depart from reality so as to empha-

size and exaggerate order, progress, prospects for future unlimited

growth, and other themes dear to the hearts of urban boosters.” Thus,

one might expect Seattle’s 1878 portrait to be a vision of the city as it

wished itself to be: a pastoral landscape surrounding an orderly grid

of streets and a bustling harbor, with little evidence of streets filled

with thigh-deep mud, stump-cursed lots, noxious effluents from

mills and canneries, or undesirable populations. True to the genre,

the 1878 panorama did offer a pleasant, idealized image of Seattle that

gave little indication of muck, clear-cuts, fish guts, or Chinese board-

ing houses. But look closely: there, along the waterfront, among the

steamers and the tall ships, a small flotilla of dugout canoes approaches

a Native encampment on the shoreline at the heart of the city. Glover’s

bird’s-eye-view Indians were matter-of-fact parts of the urban land-

scape, neither elided nor elevated. And in fact, as their inclusion in

Glover’s urban imagination suggests, real Indian people still had a

place in Seattle’s social and economic life in 1878. Despite the Bostons’

efforts to craft boundaries between Indians and settlers through

laws, lynch mobs, and torches, Seattle remained a landscape where

Indians and settlers lived alongside each other, their lives still woven

tightly together.2

When Charles Kinnear and his parents and siblings arrived a few

months after Glover unveiled his panorama, they saw this shared land-

scape firsthand. After buying a salmon from a Native vendor for five

cents through the window of their room in the Occidental Hotel, Kin-

near and his brother went out to explore their new home. They soon

came across an Indian encampment with canoes pulled ashore and racks

of salmon eggs curing over small fires, stretching for more than three

blocks along the waterfront. As the boys watched, more canoes arrived

“in a constant stream,” filled with freshly caught coho salmon, and the

M R .  G L O V E R ’ S  I M B R I C AT E D  C I T Y  /  6 7



indigenous men commenced to play slahal, the “bone game” of strat-

egy and sleight of hand known throughout the Northwest. 

Just beneath our station on the high bank were sixty-three long-haired, 

nude Indians (all their clothes in one pile) sitting in two lines facing each

other, boards on their laps, stones in their hands beating the boards as 

they sang. . . . In the middle of each line was an Indian Chief with nothing 

on but a big red handkerchief around his neck. In one hand was a pair of

carved bones which—placed under the handkerchief—were changed from

one hand to the other, the closed fists then swinging outward, again under

the handkerchief, back and forth, and the opposing chief designated the

hand supposed to be holding the bones. Both hands were then thrown

upward, the bones going from the hand not guessed, and the score keep

deposited a stone indicating the loss. The bones then went to the opposite

chief who made his trial. Bye and bye all arose, the losing side sneaking

along the beach to their wigwams . . . the stack of clothes divided into as

many piles as there were victorious Indians.

Thus the Kinnear boys, who would later become two of Seattle’s most

prominent citizens, encountered the urban indigenous frontier of

Seattle Illahee, where fine hotels existed alongside racks of curing salmon

roe and where a growing urban skyline contrasted with an old-fashioned

bone game on the cobbles in front of it.3

In Whulshootseed there is a word, yiq, that describes the process

of working designs of bear grass, maidenhair fern, or wild-cherry bark

onto the stunning woven baskets for which Duwamish, Lake, and Shil-

shole women were renowned. Imbrication, as anthropologists have

named this process in English, is by nature forceful, with deer-bone

awls pressing into watertight cedar bark or spruce root to create

images—mountain ranges, men, rain—passed down through genera-

tions of weavers. But the word has a second meaning as well; yiq can

also describe the process of working something into a tight place or, as

one elder described it, “worrying” something into place. What an apt

metaphor, then, for the process by which the urban and indigenous

worlds interacted within the landscape framed by Glover’s drawing, with

Native and Boston places and peoples woven together in a shared geog-

6 8



raphy, with a weave that was often disturbingly tight. Seattle was an

imbricated place.4

It was also a place on a threshold. Before 1880, many indigenous

people with roots in the landscape that was becoming Seattle had

remained there, continuing to pursue subsistence activities and tradi-

tional cultural practices in and around town. After 1880, the remain-

ing Duwamish, Lake, and Shilshole people would face increasing

pressures to leave the city, both because of Seattle’s sudden expansion

around the turn of the century and because of federal allotment policy

that encouraged them to move to area reservations. Meanwhile, a new

kind of Native community would take shape in the city. Indigenous

people from beyond Puget Sound, having occasionally visited Salt Water

in the past, would now make Seattle part of an annual cycle of migra-

tion, leading to the formation of a multiethnic urban Indian commu-

nity outnumbering the local indigenous population. The year 1880 was

also a turning point in the rhetorical place of Native people in white

Seattle’s civic consciousness. Despite their portrayal as markers of urban

disorder, real Indians played an important role in daily life during the

“village period.” But in the urban revolution that would take place

between 1880 and 1930, actual Native people would be overshadowed

by symbolic Indians in Seattle’s urban imagination. The matter-of-fact

canoes on Glover’s waterfront would be replaced by imagined savages,

noble or otherwise, and Indian images would receive far more atten-

tion than Indian people. The moment captured by Mr. Glover holds

elements of both the past and the future, weaving together two periods

in Seattle’s urban Indian story.5

On the ground, the warp and woof of Native and Boston lives cre-

ated a shared landscape. Not just on Seattle’s waterfront but through-

out the young city, along the rivers and shorelines around it, and just

over the encircling hills, Seattle Illahee was growing, and the shared

world that characterized the village period remained part of daily life.

Nowhere is this clearer than in that record of all but the most invisible

lives: the federal census. As intrepid enumerators moved through Seat-

tle and its environs in the spring and summer of 1880, just two years

after Mr. Glover unveiled his drawing, they captured in their forms and

M R .  G L O V E R ’ S  I M B R I C AT E D  C I T Y  /  6 9



tables some of the details behind those canoes pulling up to the litho-

graphed beach. They gave voices, if only muffled ones, to Native people

who called Seattle home, and their records, along with other accounts

of this moment in Seattle’s history, highlight the diversity of Native expe-

riences within the urban weave and provide a glimpse into the com-

plexities of a developing urban Indian population.6

In the 1880 census, Indians tend to appear in groups, suggesting

that attempts to create spatial boundaries between whites and Natives,

if not successful in banishing Indians from the city altogether, had at

least resulted in a handful of small enclaves within Seattle’s urban geog-

raphy. One such enclave existed along the waterfront near the city’s cen-

ter and was home to several families of local indigenous people. John

and his wife, Stosach, lived with the elderly Goleeaspee; the men both

fished for a living, while Stosach was a washerwoman. Samson, another

fisherman, lived with his wife, Julia, while their neighbor Moses (likely

the man whose son had died of smallpox three years before, his body

discovered in a tree trunk on the outskirts of town) hunted to support

his wife, Quitsalitsa, and their daughters, Julia and Amelia. The best-

known resident of this enclave was Kikisebloo, or “Princess Angeline,”

the eldest daughter of Seeathl and mother of Betsy, the woman who

had committed suicide to escape her husband’s abuse back in the 1850s.

Together, these families represented the continued presence of local

indigenous people in an urbanizing landscape, who combined tradi-

tional resource use with opportunities afforded by the new urban econ-

omy. One Seattle resident recalled Indian traders and vendors in the

1870s, writing of “many Indian canoes landing at the foot of Seneca

Street and Madison Street, and many Indian women [who] brought us

‘oolalies’ [berries] and clams and mallard ducks.” The small settlement

where Kikisebloo and the others lived was one site for these activities,

allowing local Native people to maintain connections to places and

resources that reflected pre-urban patterns of settlement.7

Meanwhile, on the tidelands just south of Yesler’s sawmill and the

Lava Beds, another small enclave of Indians reflected a growing pat-

tern in Seattle. At the beginning of the 1880s, the Puget Sound hops

industry was reaching international prominence, thanks in part to a

7 0



devastating blight in Europe. In a seasonal circuit that would become

part of Seattle’s urban cadence in the years to come, Native people from

British Columbia, Alaska, and elsewhere in Washington Territory trav-

eled to the fields of hops ripening in the valleys around Seattle and typ-

ically included a stay in Seattle. Listed mostly as laborers (with the women

listed, significantly, as “keeping camp” rather than keeping house), the

people the enumerator found on the tideflats were likely partway

through this seasonal round. Indian Wallace lived with Indian Jennie,

Indian Jack lived with Indian Sallie, and Indian Peter and Indian Annie

shared their camp with their son Indian Sam; all were from British

Columbia. Nearby, young indigenous Alaskan women named Indian

Kitty and Indian Rose camped with Kitty’s infant son, Indian Tommy,

while a camp close by sheltered Indian Jennie and Indian John. Not

unlike the “Chinaman John” system of nomenclature that rendered

Asian immigrants anonymous in many historical records, this “Indian”

naming practice relegated many Native people—particularly those not

connected to local families or communities—to anonymity, lacking even

a tribal designation. But their origins far from Seattle suggested that a

new kind of urban development, the creation of a far-reaching Indian

hinterland, was under way.8

And, of course, there were the Lava Beds. Here, mixed-race house-

holds of white men and Indian women existed among the saloons,

brothels, and Chinese hostels. Two such households were those of cook

William Milton, who lived with British Columbia Native Mary Murphy,

and sailor George Hill, whose wife, “Indian Mary,” also hailed from the

north. As Milton’s and Hill’s occupations suggest, many of the white

men in such relationships were on the lower rungs of the urban econ-

omy. Sometimes, economic circumstances required mixed-race couples

to share homes, as unemployed laborer Thomas Scott and “Indian Jen-

nie” did with out-of-work Canadian James Holt and Ellen Dillon, Holt’s

Indian-Hawai‘ian partner. Others, such as Julia Lowar, the daughter of

an indigenous woman from Washington Territory and a French father,

who lived on the Lava Beds with Joseph Francis, a Hebridean laborer,

could afford to keep their own homes. The backgrounds of couples like

these also reflect patterns associated with the fur trade of previous

M R .  G L O V E R ’ S  I M B R I C AT E D  C I T Y  /  7 1



decades; many of the men were from Canada or Scotland, while most

of the women were of mixed parentage, their fathers from France,

Hawai‘i, Canada, or the Celtic fringe. 

While some of the mixed-race households on the Lava Beds in 1880

appear to have been marriages (if only à la façon du pays, considering the

miscegenation laws of the time), others hint at the reason this district

was called the Lava Beds in the first place. Nova Scotian barkeeper Thomas

Asgood, for example, rented rooms to Nancy McCarthy, the daughter 

of a Frenchman and a Washington Indian, and to another “Indian

Mary,” this one a full-blood member of an unspecified Native commu-

nity. Nearby, Louise Woolene, Annie Powers, and Maggie Murphy—all

young, mixed-race women, likely from British Columbia—lived above

a tavern owned by Welshman Richard Prichard and his partner, William

Cheney. Nearby, twenty-five-year-old Indian Katie Hays boarded with

barkeep George Behan and his bartender, Thomas Barry; and Native

seventeen-year-old Nellie Hilton roomed at the establishment of Ger-

man immigrants Jacob and Mattie Wirtz. Meanwhile, Cecilia Thomas,

a twenty-nine-year-old woman of Hawai‘ian and British Columbian

Indian descent, was listed as the sole occupant of her household. While

specifics about each of these women’s lives are lost to history, it is quite

possible that some or all of them participated, at least casually, in the

sex trade for which the Lava Beds was reviled by Seattle’s voices of urban

order. Surely, a number of Indian women working in the sex trade were

missed by the enumerators, having avoided the census taker or hav-

ing been hidden by their employers. Pinnell’s Illahee may have burned

in 1878, but the “sawdust women”—whether prostitutes or not—were

still around.

Urban Indian enclaves along the waterfront and on the Lava Beds

reflected civic leaders’ desires to segregate indigenous people from

“respectable” settler society, but the distinction between them broke

down as Native men and women went uptown to work in the homes

of middle-class and elite white families. In particular, Indian women

played an important role as domestic servants and live-in laborers in

1880. Throughout Seattle, enumerators found young Indian women

living and working in the homes of white families. Fourteen-year-old,

7 2



mixed-race Hannah Benson helped minister’s wife Mary Whitworth keep

house for her husband, their civil-engineer son Fred, and their daugh-

ter Etta. Meanwhile, nineteen-year-old Lois Hilderbidle, also the daugh-

ter of a white father and Indian mother, worked as a servant in the home

of physicians Alvin and Herman Bagley and Herman’s wife, Kitty. How-

ever, Indian servants could also be found in more modest homes: Irish

laborer John Christopher and his wife, Bridget, employed fifteen-year-

old boarder Lizzie Whitney, a full-blood Washington Territory Indian;

and single-mother Henrietta Minks, a resident of the Lava Beds, received

much-needed assistance from a British Columbian woman known as

“Indian Kate.” Nothing remains to illuminate why Elizabeth FitzPatrick,

a young mixed-race woman, chose to live with and work for mill owner

George W. Stetson’s family, but we might guess: money, a bit of pres-

tige, and a ticket off the reservation. Even a handful of young Native

men took advantage of such arrangements: Willie Henry, the fourteen-

year-old son of a Nova Scotian father and a local Indian mother, was

living with James Carpenter and family when the enumerator came to

visit in 1880.

Writing in the 1920s, Mrs. E. E. Heg, a member of the Trinity Church

congregation, emphasized the importance of these Indian domestic

laborers to the white women of Seattle during this time. Noting that

the only kind of domestic help available in Seattle came from Native

women, she pointed out that such workers freed her and other Epis-

copalian women to help organize Seattle’s first parish. High-status Indian

women, meanwhile, were sometime employed by high-status white fam-

ilies, as in the case of Kikisebloo, who did laundry at the parsonage of

the First Presbyterian Church throughout the 1870s and whose impa-

tience with the minister’s young children became something of a run-

ning joke in town. Her regular journeys between the indigenous enclave

on the waterfront and the parsonage up the hill illustrate just how per-

meable boundaries were between white and Native Seattle. It also sug-

gests a certain kind of congruency between two status-conscious

societies: high-class Duwamish working for high-class Boston.9

Indigenous fishermen, hop pickers from Alaska and British Colum-

bia, the saloon crowd, and domestic servants—these were the roles into

M R .  G L O V E R ’ S  I M B R I C AT E D  C I T Y  /  7 3



which Seattle’s urban Indians were expected by their Boston neighbors

to fit. Each category came with its own respective space on the margins

of society: waterfront, tideflat, Lava Bed, laundry room. However, few

spatial expressions of power are pure or complete, and elsewhere in

Seattle, other Indians, and Indian women in particular, had become part

of settler society, not as washerwomen or camp-keepers or Lava Bed

wives, but as members of mixed-race families scattered throughout Seat-

tle. There was Jacob Harding’s wife, Lucy, the daughter of Washington

Territory and British Columbia Indians, and Jennie, the British Col-

umbian wife of German immigrant John Drummerhouse. An eight-

year-old mixed-race Indian child named Hattie, perhaps adopted (or

perhaps a disturbingly young house servant), lived with the logger Fran-

cis Guye and his wife, Eliza, both of them white; and Andrew Castro,

sixty years old, shared a home with his twenty-two-year-old Native

sister-in-law Annie and her son John, age five. The occasional marriage

between a white man and a Native woman appears in King County’s

official records as well. The 1876 wedding between Peter Brown and

an anonymous “Indian woman,” Robert M. Stewart’s 1878 marriage to

“Helen, an Indian,” and the 1881 nuptials of Louie Henry and Ellen

Hatlepoh suggest that the antimiscegenation laws of the 1850s and 1860s

were only haphazardly implemented. Even though enumerators’ sched-

ules and marriage records tell us little about these people, these brief

glimpses of lives, and perhaps even loves, nonetheless speak to the ways

that Native and settler histories had become intimately interwoven.10

Pioneer daughter Sophie Frye Bass recalled another mixed-race fam-

ily enumerated in the 1880 census, that of John and Mary Kelly and

their daughter Maria. Living in an immaculately kept little house on

Fourth Avenue between Pike and Pine streets, Washington Territory–

born Mary did laundry at home for her white neighbors, while Irish

immigrant John was a skilled blacksmith. Maria, fourteen in 1880, was

a schoolmate and friend of young Sophie Frye and other settler chil-

dren, once holding a “potlatch” by handing out candy hearts bearing

inscriptions such as “Do you love me?” and “Be my girl.” Like Mr.

Glover’s bird’s-eye view of Seattle, in which indigenous people were a

part of everyday urban life, memories of families like these attested to

7 4



the ways in which everyday relations between Indian and settler called

into question those very categories. The mixed-race family of Maria Kelly

was just as much a part of settler society as that of Sophie Frye.11

While Indian and non-Indian lives interwove at the fine-grained level

of the census schedule, on a larger scale Indian and non-Indian spaces

beyond the city limits were also beginning to interweave in 1880. After

the slumps of the 1860s and early 1870s, Seattle at last began to grow

in accordance with its founders’ imaginations, leapfrogging over enclos-

ing hills, marshes, and waterways in the late 1870s. One newspaper

editor described Seattle’s growth spurt in a call for any doubters to “go

out over the hills to the real front of action and progress,” where they

would see the signs of urban development: “fires smoking in the dis-

tance on every hill, new roofs peeping out through vistas of vanishing

foliage, trim garden fences routing out the old logs and debris.” These

changes in the landscape told “the story of extending dominion, and

the beginning of the new regime of solid growth for Seattle.” Residents

living “on the outskirts this year,” noted one observer, “find themselves

next year right in town.” This was no less true for Native people living

in and immediately around Seattle. As the city spread across the

rugged landscape between Puget Sound and Lake Washington, outly-

ing settlements—indigenous and settler alike—were imbricated into

the urban fabric.12

Seattle’s sudden expansion in the late 1870s took place on many fronts

and often uncovered glimpses into the indigenous landscape it would

soon obliterate. To the south, a terrible beach road, “broken and demor-

alized” after each winter’s rains, made its sloppy way past the oxbows

and marshes of the river valley to the settlement of Duwamish, which

had recently celebrated the opening of a lyceum, a sure sign that change

was on the way. Not far away, county officials had chosen “one of the

finest pieces of land in the county . . . over one hundred and sixty acres

of land of a black alluvial character” as the site of a farm and hospital

for the poor and indigent. Previously leased by Illahee entrepreneur John

Pinnell to several Chinese truck farmers, the farm stood on deep shell

middens created by generations of indigenous harvests, which explained

the remarkably fertile soils.13

M R .  G L O V E R ’ S  I M B R I C AT E D  C I T Y  /  7 5



Meanwhile, to the north, urban outposts seemed to be springing up

everywhere. In 1878 Belltown, immediately north of Seattle along Elliott

Bay, boasted sixty-eight houses, one school, a grocery, and a boarding-

house for shipbuilders, while more houses were under construction.

As the townscape took form, builders often unearthed bodies wrapped

in cedar bark, the remains of an indigenous cemetery. At Lake Union,

“quite a town” now surrounded David Denny’s sawmill, with close to

two hundred residents. After a sidewalk was built to the lake from Seat-

tle’s northern city limit in 1879—following the route of an indigenous

trail—residents expected streetcars, water lines, and “the villas of our

wealthy townsmen” to follow in short order. To the northwest, families

had begun clearing land around Salmon Bay in 1877, and by 1879 farms

could be found along both sides of the bay, with a population “sufficiently

numerous to sustain a district school.” And to the northeast, along the

no-longer-distant shores of Lake Washington, families began staking

claims—and more importantly, moving to them—in the late 1870s,

banking on an eventual canal connecting the lake with Puget Sound.14

Here was Seattle’s first urban sprawl, and it caught both Native people

and Native places in its weave. The Duwamish River offered evidence

of an indigenous past in the middens at the County Farm, but it also

offered evidence of an indigenous present in the form of several large

indigenous settlements along its banks. In Belltown, where growth dis-

turbed graves, living Native people camped along the beach near where

longhouses had once stood amid gardens of salal. At Salmon Bay, where

a dozen Shilshole families had been living in the 1850s, some still

remained. Doctor Jim, “manly, fine-looking, and intelligent,” according

to one observer, lived at the mouth of the bay near where Hwelchteed,

known to most settlers as Salmon Bay Charlie, owned ten acres. Mean-

while, in the Salmon Bay settlement itself, Alonzo Hamblet managed

the West Coast Improvement Company while his Tsimshian daughter-

in-law Mary concerned herself with the local church; and the Scheur-

mann family’s ten children—along with those of other mixed-race

families like the Ryersons and Tollens—helped fill the seats at the small

schoolhouse. To the east on Lake Washington, Native people camped

on Union Bay with the permission of settler Joe Somers, while close

7 6



by, Chesheeahud, called Lake Union John, and Dzakwoos, also known

as Indian Jim Zackuse, worked their respective five and ten acres at the

eastern end of Lake Union. And south of there, “Indian Jack” and his

wife, Eliza, owned an acre in Columbia City, a new suburb at the head

of a slough along the lake.15

Some of these Native men and women, like Mary Hamblet or those

camping in West Seattle on their way to the hop fields, were new to

Seattle, themselves emigrants in search of urban opportunity. Others,

like Chesheeahud and Dzakwoos, were local people with attachments

to local places. These were the Indians that an 1879 Daily Intelligencer

reported “had severed their tribal relations, taken homesteads, quit their

nomadic life and gone to farming, and who didn’t care to lose their places

on account of unpaid taxes.” Far from vanishing, these were indige-

nous people who had chosen to stay near traditional territories and make

a go of it in an urbanizing landscape. And although they had “severed

tribal relations” according to American law, they and their homes would

remain important landmarks for indigenous people traveling to and from

the city.16

However, staying in the old places was getting more and more difficult

in 1880. The urban imbrication was getting tighter, as indigenous towns

turned into poor farms, burial grounds became basements, and fishing

sites became waterfront real estate. For some Native people, the pres-

sures were simply too much. Doctor Jim, the healer living at the mouth

of Salmon Bay, was one of these. Like many other indigenous doctors

in Puget Sound, much of his social standing had been swept away by

epidemics and American medical practices; unlike some, though, Doc-

tor Jim had become fluent in English and had chosen to live close to

the settlers. But things reached a breaking point for Doctor Jim one

morning in 1880, when he hanged himself in his house, within sight

of the old Shilshole town of Tucked Away Inside.17

As bad as things had gotten for Doctor Jim, the challenges facing

indigenous people in and around Seattle were small in comparison to

what was to come. In many ways, 1880 was a brief interlude between

two dark periods in Seattle’s Indian history. The chaotic violence of ear-

lier decades had largely quieted, the epidemics had waned, and the legal-

M R .  G L O V E R ’ S  I M B R I C AT E D  C I T Y  /  7 7



ity of Native homesteading allowed for some semblance of indepen-

dence and economic stability. But the urban ambition reflected in Mr.

Glover’s bird’s-eye drawing of Seattle, and the changes attendant to it,

were about to reach new heights, and indigenous people who had wor-

ried themselves into the tight weave of the city’s rapidly urbanizing land-

scape would face challenges on a completely new scale. Fire, water, and

iron would soon change everything.

7 8


























5 / City of the Changers

W
hen 0llie wilbur was a little girl living on

the cusp of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, the

horse and buggy ride from the Muckleshoot Reservation

to Seattle was a long one and, in her words, “awful, you

know—have to go uphill, downhill, we’d all get off and walk.” Even

so, her family went every year to visit her grandmother’s brother, who

lived in a ramshackle floating house near the mouth of the Duwamish.

Seetoowathl—or Old Indian George, as his neighbors called him—still

lived where he had been born, in a place known in his language sim-

ply as Tideflats. He shared the house with his wife, who was either “quite

insane” or “the meanest old . . .” depending on whom you talked to,

and he made a living by catching dogfish and rendering their oil for

local sawmills. (“That’s all he does, is fish, the old man,” Ollie recalled.)

The monotony of fishing was broken every September when Ollie and

her parents came with canned berries from the foothills. Their jour-

ney linked Seetoowathl, who refused to speak English with visiting ethno-

graphers, and his prickly wife to a reservation some thirty miles distant.

Long past the treaty and the Battle of Seattle, indigenous people whose

ancestors once lived in Duwamish, Shilshole, and Lake communities

like Little Crossing-Over Place and Herring’s House still lived in Seat-

tle, even as many of their kin found homes far from the city.1

Between 1880 and 1920, however, forces were at work that would

make indigenous survival in Seattle virtually impossible. During those

years, the city saw its most explosive period of urban growth, which

spelled disaster for Native people trying to live in traditional ways and

places. By the 1920s, in fact, indigenous Seattle—the geographies and

communities that predated the founding of the city—would come to

7 9



an end, even if Indian Seattle would not. The wholesale transforma-

tion of the urban landscape dramatically altered indigenous subsistence

practices and created a new place-story in which the “vanishing race”

and the ghostly Indian haunting the city were self-fulfilling prophecies.

The Indian people who remained in Seattle, meanwhile, became almost

invisible as they adapted to life in a new metropolis. 

According to oral tradition, Seeathl had seen this change coming.

During treaty negotiations in 1855, he had warned his people to pay spe-

cial attention to the Americans and their government. “You folks observe

the changers who have come to this land,” he told those gathered. “You

folks observe them well.” In calling the Americans “changers,” Seeathl

invoked the figure of Dookweebathl, the Changer, who had organized

the chaotic landscape of deep time and made the world habitable for the

human people. It was a particularly apt choice of terms. As powerful

forces reshaped Seattle in the decades around the turn of the century,

indigenous people found themselves caught up in a transformation of

their world nearly as dramatic as those described in the ancient stories.

By 1920, Seattle had become the city of a new kind of Changers.2

A
t first glance, seattle’s two most important fires seem

unrelated. The first, in 1889, utterly destroyed the city’s com-

mercial district; the second, four years later, obliterated sev-

eral Native longhouses along the West Seattle shoreline.

In Seattle’s urban mythology, the earlier conflagration is one of the city’s

great turning points, the phoenixlike moment from which the city rose

up to become the Northwest’s premier metropolis. The other is a mere

historical footnote, forgotten by nearly all of Seattle’s chroniclers even

though it made headlines at the time. But the two stories they represent—

Seattle’s urban triumph and the dispossession of local indigenous

people—are in fact one story. The path between a boiling pot of glue

in 1889 and an arsonist’s torch in 1893 represents not just the trajec-

tory of those four years but a broader pattern: in the last two decades

of the nineteenth century and the first two decades of the twentieth,

indigenous people in Seattle found themselves on the losing side of urban

development. Although many of the specifics of this “dispossession by

8 0



degrees” are lost to the historical record, the shared context of these

two fires offers insights into the seemingly inexorable, yet often invis-

ible, marginalization of the Duwamish, Shilshole, and Lake peoples.3

Rudyard Kipling, imperial apologist and rhetorical bearer of the white

man’s burden, is an unlikely figure to appear in a history of Seattle, but

he offers a graphic (if typically acerbic) description of the city just after

the Great Fire of 1889. Arriving in late July as part of a transcontinen-

tal tour, he described the near-apocalyptic aftermath. “The wharves had

all burned down, and we tied up where we could, crashing into the rot-

ten foundations of a boathouse as a pig roots in high grass,” he wrote.

“In the heart of the business quarters there was a horrible black smudge,

as though a Hand had come down and rubbed the place smooth. I know

now what being wiped out means.” Kipling also noted the scores of can-

vas tents set up among the ruins, full of men carrying on with “the lath

and string arrangements out of which a western town is made.”4

Seattle had nearly been unmade by the terrible events of a few weeks

earlier, when early in the afternoon of 6 June, a pot of glue boiled over

and started a fire at Victor Clairmont’s basement cabinet shop at the

corner of Front and Madison. The flames rapidly spread upward and

outward to surrounding wooden buildings. Thanks to brisk late-spring

winds and a laughably insufficient water system, by nightfall sixty acres

(thirty-three blocks), including virtually the entire business district, had

burned to the ground and to the waterline. Yesler’s wharf, the Lava Beds,

and other Seattle institutions all disappeared into Kipling’s black

smudge. The fire could be seen miles away; one Snohomish Indian

woman recalled seeing her older relatives cover their faces with their

hands, rocking and wailing as the southern horizon glowed redly

throughout the night.5

Seattleites moved quickly to repair the damage. As soon as the ashes

cooled, business owners resumed their affairs in the canvas tents, but

they expended little effort on their less seemly neighbors, many of whom

had lost everything to the flames. Orange Jacobs recalled that “the fallen

angels and the upper class of gamblers could take care of themselves,”

while other, less fortunate citizens required “careful and necessary

scrutiny” to prevent the handing out of “free lunches.”6 The long-stand-

C I T Y  O F  T H E  C H A N G E R S  /  8 1



ing enmity between the people of the Lava Beds and their more strait-

laced neighbors shaped responses to the disaster, but as before, the two

elements of Seattle society had always existed in a symbiotic relation-

ship. Before long, the Lava Beds had resumed activity. In fact, within

months, they were more active than ever, as the Great Fire spurred a

riot of urban development in the old commercial district. Wooden struc-

tures lost to the fire were replaced by ones of brick and stone, and as

capital poured in to rebuild the city, so did new immigrants. For the

next year, more than two thousand new immigrants arrived in Seattle

every month, nearly doubling the city’s population to over forty thou-

sand people by the Great Fire’s first anniversary. In terms of the built

landscape, population growth, and civic self-identity, the Great Fire was

a critical juncture in Seattle’s urban story.

But, in fact, the Great Fire had only accelerated growth already under

way. It was not the flames of a boiling glue pot but rather those inside

a Northern Pacific Railroad engine that had truly sparked Seattle’s great

lurch toward metropolis. In 1883, the city held its Railroad Jubilee, which

included a massive salmon barbecue hosted by local Indians. The Jubilee

proved premature, however; the first Northern Pacific train would not

arrive until June 1884, over tracks laid by some 1,400 Chinese labor-

ers and heralded by a twenty-one-gun salute using cannon from the

1856 Battle of Seattle. Even then, service was poor, uncomfortable, and

inconsistent, leading to complaints from locals and the eventual aban-

donment of the line by the Northern Pacific. It took yet another year

for the “Orphan Road” to become a functioning railway, but when it

finally did, in late 1885, it began a new wave of immigration to Seattle

that had yet to peak when the city burned.7

Eight years later, the 7 March edition of the Seattle Times noted a sharp

increase in the number of “red denizens” on Ballast Island on the rebuilt

Seattle waterfront. Ballast Island was exactly what its name implied: a

massive pile of rock, brick, and other debris dropped by ships near the

foot of Washington Street. It was one of the few places in town where

large groups of Indians were tolerated. On this day in 1893, ten large

dugout canoes and several smaller ones, some loaded down to the water-

line with furniture, tools, and trunks of clothing, had, along with their

8 2



owners, attracted a “large and curious crowd of spectators.” Dispatched

to Ballast Island by his editors, the reporter soon learned that the canoes’

occupants had been burned out of their homes on the West Seattle shore-

line. According to the Indians, eight houses had been destroyed, their

owners and inhabitants “turned out indiscriminately, without reference

to the disposition of the Indians, who, however, took the matter with-

out resistance.” Some of the now-homeless Native people were quite

elderly and had lived in West Seattle for many years, carrying monikers

like West Seattle Jack, West Seattle Jim, and West Seattle Charlie to prove

it. Indeed, these were the people of Herring’s House, the old indigenous

town, which had survived the early phases of urban development. But

the Saturday before, a man named Watson, with the help of several other

West Seattle residents, had started the fire that brought centuries of Her-

ring’s House’s history to an end.8

At first glance, the Gilded Age razing of this small Native neighbor-

hood in West Seattle seems an anomaly. The deliberate destruction of

Herring’s House seems more in keeping with the spasmodic violence

of Seattle’s early years than with the nascent progressivism of the 1890s.

But the events of March 1893 were part of a larger urban process of

indigenous dispossession that had begun decades before, although that

process accelerated in the late nineteenth century with Seattle’s met-

ropolitan ascent. 

Not long before the fire of 1893, West Seattle had still been an iso-

lated community, separated from Seattle by Elliott Bay and the wide,

muddy Duwamish estuary. By the late 1880s, its residents were clam-

oring for regular connections with Seattle, while Seattleites became

increasingly interested in excursions to (and suburban homes on) the

West Seattle peninsula, with its beaches, fresh air, and views of the water-

front and Olympic Mountains. And so on Christmas Eve 1888, the ferry

City of Seattle, equipped to carry wagons, buggies, and cattle, began reg-

ular eight-minute passages between the two cities, subsidized by the

West Seattle Land Improvement Company, itself bankrolled by San Fran-

cisco capitalists. With the new maritime connection, the company began

buying and clearing land, building roads and sidewalks, and establishing

a cable car line from the ferry landing to a new business district. As

C I T Y  O F  T H E  C H A N G E R S  /  8 3



one observer recalled, “it was quite the thing for newcomers to ride back

and forth just for the pleasure of the fresh salt air. Even retired deep-

sea captains enjoyed the trip.” Wharves and grain elevators near the

ferry terminal soon followed, and by 1893 West Seattle was in the midst

of a development boom, in no small part thanks to the population explo-

sion after the Great Fire of 1889. Muckleshoot tribal member Gilbert

King George described his mother’s stories of what that had meant for

the people of Herring’s House:

My mother told me of the days when this area was being claimed, and play-

mates’ homes were destroyed for relocation purposes. I always remember

because she was so puzzled by what happened to her friends’ home. She 

got up the next day, there was a pile of ashes there. Whole families were

removed. Relocated. So you have to wonder, you know, what are the mental

impacts on a mother and a father, grandparents, who have to literally pick 

up their family and have to move.

The Great Fire of 1889 had spurred growth in West Seattle, which in

turn encouraged the fiery ouster of indigenous people living in places

slated for “improvement.”9

The fire of March 1893 is unusual only in that it merited the atten-

tion of the press. Other fires, ignored in newspapers and other histor-

ical documents, continued to smolder in the memories of indigenous

people who had witnessed them. Occasionally, these memories found

their way into the written record. During a landmark 1920s land claims

case, for example, older Duwamish Indians recalled what had happened

to their villages as Seattle grew around them in the second half of the

nineteenth century. Major Hamilton described how, “when the settlers

came, they drove us away and then they destroy the house and even set

fires to get us away from these villages.” Similarly, Jennie Davis, a Lake

Indian (and the daughter of Chesheeahud, the indigenous home-

steader on Lake Union’s Portage Bay), portrayed the transition from

Native to settler residences: “Some of [the Indian houses] was gone and

I see where the construction of some of the buildings.” West Seattle

itself was the scene of more than one fire; Sam Tecumseh, the son of

8 4



one of Arthur Denny’s close Indian allies, recalled the large “potlatch

house” that had once stood at Herring’s House along with the smaller

longhouses. The result of two summers’ worth of labor by nearly a score

of skilled builders, the big house alone was valued in 1920s currency

at around $5,000. “When the white settlers came,” he told the court-

room through an interpreter, “then they took possession of [the Indi-

ans’] cleared land and also destroyed the house.” These indigenous

place-stories link the fire of March 1893 to a longer history in which

urban development and Indian dispossession went hand in hand.10

Seattle’s growth also caused a major shift in the urban labor pool.

Gone were the days when settlers needed the work of Native people to

conduct everyday town life, when Henry Yesler needed Indian men for

his sawmill or white women needed Indian women to do their laun-

dry. As more and more newcomers arrived, many indigenous people

were pushed aside, their services no longer necessary. For the Duwamish

man Dzakwoos, who had kept a homestead on Lake Union, the loss of

work forced him to abandon his homestead and relocate to the east,

where he would become part of a Native community living at Mono-

han on Lake Sammamish, where mill jobs remained. This community

would come to be part of the modern-day Snoqualmie Tribe, and present-

day tribal members understand the changing demographics and econ-

omy in and around Seattle as a key reason for the development of this

new community. Snoqualmie elder Ed Davis recalled, for example, that

the people at Monohan, including Dzakwoos and his extended family,

“all come together when they run out of jobs.”11

And so the refugees from Herring’s House, characterized as indig-

nant but “philosophical” by the reporter, had some decisions to make

as they gathered on Ballast Island in 1893. They could move to the “light-

house colony,” a windblown squatters’ encampment at West Point north

of town, and some apparently did. Or they could move upriver: the area

around the confluence of the Black and Duwamish rivers had been the

eponymous Duwamish “inside” for centuries, and in the 1890s several

Indian families still lived there, in a narrow stretch of the river valley

that settlers simply called Duwamish. (The descendants of many of those

people would become the modern-day Duwamish Tribe.) The refugees’

C I T Y  O F  T H E  C H A N G E R S  /  8 5



third option was to go further afield and apply for an allotment of land

on one of Puget Sound’s reservations, such as Port Madison (later known

as Suquamish), Muckleshoot, or Tulalip. For many, this last option

seemed to be the safest. At a time when Indian people enjoyed few legal

rights, faced discrimination and hostility from many of their non-Native

neighbors, and were often forced to live at the peripheries of the new

economy, land, even when held in trust, could offer security that life in

and immediately around Seattle could not.12

Ironically, the rapid urban expansion that had fueled the fire in West

Seattle, with its ferries and beach cabins, slowed soon after the com-

munity of Herring’s House was razed and its members dispersed. Just

a few weeks after Watson’s arson, the stock market collapsed and banks

began to fail across the nation. The Panic of 1893 was on. In West Seat-

tle, the Panic led to what one observer called a “nervous breakdown”:

the ferries and cable car stopped running, real-estate ventures crum-

bled, and growth came to a standstill. The depression that followed damp-

ened Seattle’s spirits for four long years, and we might ask whether West

Seattle Charlie and his neighbors might have still had homes on the

shore there if only the timing had been a little different.13

Meanwhile, other Native people continued to live in Seattle, albeit

in diminishing numbers, after the burning of Herring’s House. In fact,

it was those diminishing numbers that would lead to a change in the

way indigenous people were portrayed in Seattle—indeed, the fact that

they were portrayed at all. Whereas the workings of indigenous dispos-

session in the late nineteenth century rarely appear in the historical record,

by the dawn of the twentieth century, Indians in Seattle—especially ones

that seemed to be vanishing—were front-page news.

O
n the last evening of May 1896, Kikisebloo, the

daughter of Seeathl, died of tuberculosis in her home on

the Seattle waterfront. Her passing was big news in the

city, where shops sold postcards of her image and where

a chance encounter with the “Indian princess” was one of the highlights

of the urban experience. Children sneaked into the city morgue to see

8 6



her body, while undertakers argued over who had the right to bury it.

When the funeral finally took place on 6 June, thousands of Seattleites

lined downtown streets to watch the procession make its way to a full

requiem mass at Our Lady of Good Hope. Afterward, Kikisebloo was

laid to rest in Lakeview Cemetery in a canoe-shaped coffin, next to her

old friend and ally Henry Yesler. Her grandson Joe Foster, whose

terrorized mother had committed suicide so many years before during

Seattle’s “village period,” was the sole Indian present.14

Kikisebloo’s life had been like Seattle’s Indian history writ small.

Present with her father at the Denny Party’s settlement at Alki, she was

closely allied with Seattle’s founding families, many of whom employed

her as a washerwoman. Simultaneously noblewoman and drudge, Kiki-

sebloo elicited a wide range of reactions from her white neighbors:

some revered her as a touchstone to the indigenous past (case in point

her much-ballyhooed introduction to visiting U.S. president Benjamin

Harrison in 1891), while others, especially young people, were more

likely to throw rocks at her as she passed in the street. For her part,

Kikisebloo was famous both for her loyalty to pioneer families and for

throwing stones of her own (or clams or potatoes, depending on what

was handy) at her tormentors. In the last years of her life, she lived in

poverty on the Seattle waterfront, simultaneously watched over by solic-

itous society women and lampooned in the press. By the time of her

death, Kikisebloo had come to represent both the “noble savage”

(expressed best by the urban legend that she had brought warning of

the 1856 Indian uprising to Seattle residents) and the stubborn, back-

ward “Siwash” doomed to extinction.15

In the nineteenth century, Kikisebloo’s life had reflected many of the

contradictions inherent in Seattle’s Indian story. On the eve of the twen-

tieth century, however, her death heralded a new pattern. The presence

of indigenous people in Seattle was used by white observers to craft a

powerful new narrative about the inevitable disappearance of Indians

from Seattle and the modern world. Native people had always been sym-

bols in Seattle—witness the debates about vice, fire, and disease in the

village period—but in earlier decades, they had also been a force to be

C I T Y  O F  T H E  C H A N G E R S  /  8 7



reckoned with. As their numbers dwindled in the early twentieth cen-

tury, local Indians were recast as stock characters in melodramatic sto-

ries about urban progress, representing both the inevitability of

indigenous decline and the inexorable ascent of metropolitan Seattle.

Here was a new place-story.

While she was by far the most celebrated of Seattle’s “last” Indians,

Kikisebloo was by no means the last of the last. Other Duwamish, Lake,

and Shilshole people continued to live in Seattle well into the twenti-

eth century. Some displayed a remarkable commitment to particular

places. On Salmon Bay, for example, the small cedar-plank home of

Hwelchteed and his wife, Cheethluleetsa, also known as Madeline, was

a distinctive landmark on the shore opposite a settlement now known

as Ballard. Cheethluleetsa and her husband harvested clams, salmon,

and berries to sell in Ballard, using the income to purchase items from

area merchants or for ceremonies held with visiting relatives. Like

another Salmon Bay Indian, nicknamed Crab John, whose shouts of

“salmon, ten cents” were a fond memory of many Ballard residents,

Hwelchteed and Cheethluleetsa were living links between the indige-

nous town of Tucked Away Inside and the modern town of Ballard.

Indeed, Hwelchteed portrayed himself as the hereditary headman of

the Shilsholes and, as such, garnered much attention from residents

and tourists alike, particularly after the death of Kikisebloo.16

Meanwhile, on Portage Bay at the eastern end of Lake Union, Che-

sheeahud and his wife, Tleebuleetsa (confusingly, also called Madeline),

regularly entertained visitors from area reservations at their homestead.

When Tleebuleetsa lay dying in the spring of 1906, relatives came from

area reservations and elsewhere to keep vigil, and a Seattle Post-Intelli-

gencer photographer captured the image of family members as they

arrived at the small house on the flats of Portage Bay. In the background

of the photo, the new University of Washington campus and streetcar

suburbs reach to the horizon. Two supposedly separate worlds—the

urban and the indigenous—were in fact the same place. (Nowhere is

this clearer than at Chesheeahud and Tleebuleetsa’s graves, which lie

in the old section of Seattle’s Evergreen-Washelli Cemetery immediately

next to that of Hiram Gill, a controversial Seattle mayor who made his

8 8



career playing off the bad blood between Lava Beds society and the “law

and order crowd.”)17

Hwelchteed, Chesheeahud, and their wives were relatively success-

ful at surviving in Seattle, but other indigenous people had a harder

time of it. Living among the marshy suburbs on Portage Bay was one

thing; trying to eke out a living on the industrial downtown waterfront

was another. In 1910, a Duwamish couple named Billy and Ellen Phillips

made the headlines after a winter storm destroyed Billy’s crabbing

boat, their primary source of income. Identified as a nephew of See-

athl, Billy (whose Whulshootseed name was Sbeebayoo) and his wife

quickly became a minor cause célèbre. The Post-Intelligencer printed

graphic descriptions of the couple’s living conditions in their cabin at

the foot of Stacy Street: both were malnourished, Billy was nearly blind,

and Ellen was suffering from chest pains. For some time, they had been

surviving on neighbors’ stale bread and on fish donated by a nearby

cannery. The Post-Intelligencer coverage inspired a broader charity cam-

paign aimed at not just keeping them alive but also paying for their relo-

cation. As reporters milked the story for all it was worth, they also

chronicled the process by which a skilled fisherman and his wife had

been reduced to such dire circumstances. His camping places along

the Puget Sound shoreline had become private property, and the new

owners resented Indian trespassers. Both game and fish were harder

to come by, as habitat loss, pollution, and commercial fishing took their

toll. Even Billy’s canoe had been lost. These factors, combined with age

and ill health, had nearly spelled the end for Ellen and Billy.18

The struggle of the Phillips was not unique to Seattle. Throughout

Puget Sound, indigenous people were finding fewer and fewer places

to call their own. While the treaties of 1855 had allowed Indians to leave

the reservation to hunt and fish and work, living off-reservation was

another matter, especially as the non-Indian population continued to

burgeon. Bureau of Indian Affairs agent S. A. Eliot described the sit-

uation in the 1910s: 

The most serious situation among the Sound Indians is occasioned by the

large number of homeless vagrants. . . . The reservations on the Sound are

C I T Y  O F  T H E  C H A N G E R S  /  8 9



now all allotted and there remains a remnant variously estimated at from 

one to three thousand Indians who are landless and homeless. These people

wander up and down the Sound, living on the beaches and constantly evicted

or ordered to move on by their white neighbors. In one or two places they

have established considerable villages, but they have nothing there but squat-

ter’s rights.

In the 1920s, Suquamish tribal member Charles Alexis reported seeing

other Indians living in impoverished conditions on sandspits and in other

marginal locations around Puget Sound in earlier years. The “lighthouse

colony” at West Point, to which some of the refugees of the Herring’s

House arson had briefly removed, was one such place. While Alexis and

Eliot had very different perspectives on these landless Native people—

one as a tribal witness in a land claims case, the other as a government

advocate of Indian “industrial and moral development”—they both saw

Indian landlessness in urban Puget Sound as a dilemma.19

For many Native families still living in and around Seattle in the 1910s,

allotment at Muckleshoot, Suquamish, and other reservations remained

the most realistic solution to this dilemma. In their applications for allot-

ment, Indian men and women both outlined their long connections to

Tucked Away Inside and other indigenous communities, as well as to

Seattle itself, and exchanged those connections for a new kind of secu-

rity on the reservations. Even “Lake Union John,” the man named for

his place, left the city: soon after his wife’s death in 1906, Chesheeahud

sold his property on Portage Bay (making him one of the richest Indi-

ans in Puget Sound) and removed to the Port Madison Reservation,

where he died four years later. The only reminder of his presence on

the bay was the name of the plat set up on his former homestead; even

today, legal descriptions of lots in the neighborhood designate them as

part of “John’s Addition.”20

Billy and Ellen Phillips did not initially relocate to a reservation.

Instead, with the help of cousins from Suquamish and donations from

non-Indian Seattleites, the couple moved into a new cabin on Salmon

Bay, next to that of Hwelchteed and Cheethluleetsa, who may have been

relatives. The little enclave near old Tucked Away Inside would not exist

9 0



much longer, though. Sometime in 1914 or 1915, during construction

of locks for a ship canal connecting Puget Sound to Lake Washington,

Cheethluleetsa died. Three months later, Indian agents from Port

Madison came to take Hwelchteed to the reservation. Soon after that,

Billy Phillips burned their home in keeping with Native strictures against

moving into a house where someone had died. Neighbor Andrew Jacob-

sen recalled that the Phillips place caught fire as well: “He let that burn

too; he was clearing the land.” When the locks were completed in 1916,

none of the old indigenous people remained near the site of old Tucked

Away Inside; the only Indian people living on Salmon Bay were the

mixed-race inhabitants of Ballard and surrounding neighborhoods.21

Although they offer glimpses into the concrete workings of indige-

nous marginalization, contemporary accounts of Seattle’s “last” Indi-

ans also reflect deep-seated assumptions about the racial destiny of

Native people in general. Not unlike tales of Indian ghosts, these are

place-stories inhabited by the “vanishing Indian” and a cast of charac-

ters drawn from the broader national imagination. Princess Angeline

was “the Pocahontas of the West,” the Phillips were members of the

“fast falling band of Siwashes,” and Lake Union John and Madeline

represented a final chapter in the “romantic history of early Seattle.”

As elsewhere in the country, indigenous people who survived in Seat-

tle seemed like temporal anomalies, holdouts from an earlier age. Of

Native women selling wares on the city’s streets, for example, one writer

claimed that “nothing has ever happened to any of them in the city, but

they remain what Darwin calls a persistent type, and stuck like a porous

plaster.” White writers described other Native Seattleites in similar ways.

Mandy Seattle lived “in the past . . . when she herself was young and

straight as the shoots of the alder in springtime,” while her kinswoman

Mary Sam Seattle, who had once helped clear land for the first settlers,

had been “left by the side, jetsam thrown up by the ebb and flow of

human activities, as exemplified in the upbuilding of this city.” Simul-

taneously stuck in the past and vanishing into it, indigenous people in

Seattle were characterized by local newspapers as “Our Citizens of Yes-

terday” and a “wretched remnant.”22

Accounts of people like Salmon Bay Charlie, then, were often clouded

C I T Y  O F  T H E  C H A N G E R S  /  9 1



by powerful ideas about the inevitable decline and disappearance of Indi-

ans as a race. They also reflected a major shift in the place of Indian

people in urban affairs. As combatants and laborers, alleged vectors of

contagion and supposed purveyors of vice, Indians had played a cen-

tral, and material, role in civic politics in the nineteenth century. By the

early twentieth century, however, Indians were no longer a threat. No

one was worried about Hwelchteed and his wife bringing smallpox to

town or about Tleebuleetsa and her husband burning down the city.

And aside from the few who ponied up cash for the Phillips’ move, nei-

ther did white Seattleites seem all that concerned about their long-term

welfare. Instead, the presence of people like Mandy Seattle simply

served as an allegory about both the fate of the vanishing race and the

city’s urban success. Seen as having little material use, indigenous

people could still serve a rhetorical purpose. They could still be used

to tell place-stories.

Like indigenous people, indigenous places also served important sym-

bolic roles in twentieth-century Seattle. There was a growing interest

in Seattle, and around the country, in “Indian” place-names. Both Uni-

versity of Washington anthropologist T. T. Waterman and his history

department colleague Edmond S. Meany, for example, received regular

requests for “picturesque” and “quaint” Indian names for estates, beach

cabins, boats, and parks. Elsewhere, such names could be used to mar-

ket urban development itself. In the spring of 1909, for example, the

real-estate firm of Calhoun, Denny, and Ewing held a promotional event

for their new residential plat, just in time for the Alaska-Yukon-Pacific

Exposition. Called Licton Springs, the neighborhood-to-be just beyond

Seattle’s northern city limit drew its name from the red pigment that

Native people had collected there for use in ceremonies. In fact, it was

this connection to the indigenous past that made Licton Springs desir-

able. “The opening of a plat with these natural features in the East would

create a riot,” crowed one advertisement. “They have learned to appre-

ciate such treasures. Apparently Seattle is arriving at such a stage.” Using

“legends of our Indian tribes now extinct” to sell suburban homesites

made perfect sense in Seattle, where actual indigenous people seemed

to be on their way out, save for “here or there a relic.”23

9 2



As “great throngs” rode new trolleys to Licton Springs, they took

the waters, visited the nearby shake cabin that had once belonged to

David Denny, and entered contests to win free lots. However, should

one of those Indian “relics” deign to “worship the God of Health” at

the springs—or, more tellingly, should one of their ghosts choose to

haunt the place—one writer warned what would happen:

And it may come to pass that if the spirit of Chief Seattle or Leschi, or what-

soever Hyas Tyee was wont to come to mix his war paint at Licton Springs 

in the centuries that are passed, should chance again this way on a similar

mission bent, he would come plum against a blue-coated, brass-buttoned

caretaker, who would take him by the lapel of his war bonnet and, leading

him down the cement walk, among the electric lights to the confines of Licton

Park should tell him to move on. For this is the 20th Century, and to “move

on” is the edict for all of us.

Taken alongside the experiences of Sbeebayoo and other Native men

and women, this Licton Springs place-story suggested that there was

very little room for indigenous people—alive or undead—in modern

Seattle. Their legends and place-names, on the other hand, made great

copy. Even the symbolic landscape now seemed to belong to the new

Changers.24

S
eattle is a bad place to build a city. Steep hills of crum-

bly sand atop slippery clay, a winding river with a wide estu-

ary and expansive tidal flats, ice age kettle lakes and bogs, and

plunging ravines and creeks are all sandwiched between Puget

Sound and vast, deep Lake Washington. But it was built anyway, despite

all this, and today Seattle’s watersheds in particular are among its most

transformed landscapes: where four rivers once joined to become the

Duwamish, now only one flows; Lake Washington empties to the west

instead of the south and is shallower; other lakes, creeks, and beaches

have been filled, dredged, culverted, and bulkheaded. In the last decade

of the nineteenth century and the first two decades of the twentieth—

roughly the same years that the “last” Indians populated Seattle head-

C I T Y  O F  T H E  C H A N G E R S  /  9 3



lines—the city undertook a series of massive engineering projects that

turned hills into islands, straightened one river and obliterated another,

and reshaped entire watersheds, driven by what one urban scholar has

called the “leveling impulse.”25

Seattle civic leaders had long held ambitious visions for improving

what they called the “natural advantages” of their city. The deepwater

port backed by two significant bodies of freshwater had spelled oppor-

tunity since the Fourth of July, 1854, when Thomas Mercer gave the

name Lake Union to a body of water he hoped would someday link Lake

Washington with Puget Sound. Despite various attempts at linking the

lakes with flumes and ditches, large-scale efforts were beyond the reach

of the young city. Other problems—most notably the steep hills that

ringed downtown and the untidy margin between land and sea—

remained unsolved throughout much of Seattle’s early history. By the

end of the nineteenth century, however, the technology and capital were

available to begin serious attempts at terraforming. In 1895, former gov-

ernor Eugene Semple proposed cutting a canal through Beacon Hill to

connect Lake Washington with the Duwamish River, which until that

point had only connected via the shallow, sluggish, and snag-filled

Black River. Authorized by the state legislature, construction began in

1901, with soil and clay from Beacon Hill being used to fill the tide-

lands at the mouth of the Duwamish. While the South Canal project

never reached completion—cave-ins and spiraling costs proved its death

knell—Semple’s passion for reshaping the Seattle landscape continued

in the works of other men. The managers of the Seattle General Con-

struction Company, for example, carried on with the filling of the tide-

lands, using sediments dredged from the Duwamish. Eight years and

24 million cubic yards of silt later, the company had replaced the river

delta with the world’s largest man-made island, flat, dry, and ready for

industrial tenants. That same year, the flood-prone, meandering

Duwamish, long a source of frustration, became the focus of engineers’

efforts with the creation of the Duwamish Waterway Commission.

Dredging began in the fall of 1913, and by 1920, only one original bend

of the river remained within the city limits; the rest was a more-or-less

straight, fifty-foot-deep channel ideal for large seagoing vessels. 

9 4



The most dramatic project, however, took Semple’s idea of a canal

and moved it north. Under the leadership of Hiram M. Chittenden, of

the Army Corps of Engineers, and Seattle City Engineer Reginald H.

Thomson, the Lake Washington Ship Canal linked Puget Sound, Lake

Union, and Lake Washington through state-of-the-art locks at Salmon

Bay, opening the lakes to maritime traffic beginning in 1917. Denny Hill

was mostly gone by then, too, its earth used to fill tidelands that now

fronted a wide, straight, and deep Duwamish Waterway. The Lake Wash-

ington watershed had been reoriented entirely; instead of flowing

south out of the Black River, it now moved north and west through the

Hiram M. Chittenden Locks in Ballard, and the lake itself was ten to

twenty feet lower. Together, all of these changes would have profound

impacts on indigenous people and places.26

For the men who envisioned and then enacted these changes, Indi-

ans were irrelevant. Except as emblems of a vanishing past, Native people

virtually never appear in the writings and plans of Thomson, Chitten-

den, and the other modern Changers. Instead, the creators of Seattle’s

new urban ecology thought they were improving nature. Thomson, for

example, called the Duwamish’s natural curves “ugly” and “unsightly,”

preferring a channelized and useful river to one that was messy and

unpredictable. Meanwhile, ship canal visionary Chittenden argued that

the transformation of Lake Washington and Lake Union was “distinctly

a case where utilitarian ends can be accomplished without any sacrifice

of sentimental interests.” Each of these men downplayed the social costs

of reengineering Seattle’s landscape; relocating undesirable people,

when mentioned at all, was simply one of the benefits of efficient urban

planning.27

That none of them mentioned Indians should not come as a sur-

prise. For one thing, adherents to the modern urban-planning tradi-

tion paid little attention to local knowledge or history; instead, they looked

to abstract, positivist models in which attachments to place and past

bore little relevance. In other words, indigeneity and modernity were

mutually exclusive in the minds of urban planners. At the same time,

urban Indians were disappearing into a diverse category of people and

communities known as Seattle’s underclass, a grouping that would serve

C I T Y  O F  T H E  C H A N G E R S  /  9 5



as the bogeyman in planning schemes for decades to come. The pres-

ence of Indian people, when noticed at all, could in fact mark areas in

“need” of urban renewal. In 1892, for example, one observer described

the “Shantytown” neighborhood around Kikisebloo’s house on the

waterfront in language similar to that used to malign the Duwamish

and the places where a canal needed to be built:

What a blemish on this fair and growing city is that particular locality, where

scores of shanties, lean-tos, and sheds, holding a heterogeneous mass of

humanity, are huddled together—little children with old faces, unkempt men

and women, dirty dogs, stray cats, the sewage from unclean sewers pouring

down contagion and filth, moral and physical ill-being—all down that hill-

side, where the tumble-down dwellings are piled in many cases one over 

the other.

In a pattern that had begun with the old Lava Beds and that would con-

tinue into the late twentieth century, Indianness became a marker of

urban disorder. In the case of Thomson, Chittenden, and their fellow

Changers, though, those in charge of landscape change were more likely

to ignore indigenous people altogether.28

Not that there wasn’t evidence of Native people all around Thomson

and the others; beyond the front-page stories of Billy Phillips and other

beleaguered “last” Indians, large-scale civic-engineering projects could

themselves reveal evidence of the indigenous inhabitants of Seattle.

This was particularly true in the case of the Lake Washington Ship Canal.

In 1913, workers exposed a deep shell midden that had once been part

of Tucked Away Inside. And when Lake Washington dropped several

feet in 1916 as the last barrier between it and Lake Union was dyna-

mited, even older relics were revealed. At a marshy cove on Union Bay,

rows of wooden posts—the remains of the fishing weir at the indige-

nous town of Little Canoe Channel—stood exposed, and ancient stone

hearths resurfaced along the new, lower shoreline. But even these dis-

coveries could serve as arguments for the “improvements” to Lake Wash-

ington. In the Seattle Town Crier, M. J. Carter wrote that the hearths,

created by a “dusky race of primitive men,” proved that the canal was

9 6



a “natural” improvement. “Nature moves slowly and on many feet,” he

wrote, “but man, harnessing the pent forces of the earth to his needs,

strikes with irreverent hand, and the entombed secrets of the past stand

revealed.” Rather than evoke the importance of such places to indige-

nous people, these unearthings only confirmed the naturalness of the

engineering marvels that revealed and then obliterated them. These men

thought they were restoring nature.29

But for Native people trying to maintain connections to traditional

places within Seattle, the changes to the landscape in the first two decades

of the twentieth century were far from irrelevant—they were devastat-

ing. Simply finding traditional foods, for example, had become close

to impossible. The Duwamish estuary’s eelgrass beds, which had shel-

tered young salmon and armies of herring, were gone, buried under

the fill of Harbor Island and bisected by the new Duwamish Waterway.

The great middens around Smith’s Cove—proof of the spot’s wealth of

clams and other shellfish—were now covered by a landfill. The oxbows

and bends of the Duwamish, once home to clouds of waterfowl, had

become avenues for global shipping. And when Lake Washington

dropped with the opening of the ship canal, its outlet, the Black River,

ceased to exist. Duwamish descendant Joseph Moses recalled that it “was

quite a day for the white people at least. The waters just went down,

down,” he told a local historian, “until our landing and canoes stood

dry and there was no Black River at all. There were pools, of course,

and the struggling fish trapped in them. People came from miles around,

laughing and hollering and stuffing fish into gunny sacks.” And on Lake

Union, business and residential development wiped out the trout pop-

ulation. “Too much house now—all gone,” Chesheeahud told one

observer, not long before he finally just sold up and left for the reser-

vation. In reordering the landscape for urban utility, Seattle’s Chang-

ers had dramatically reduced the utility—and habitability—of that

landscape for indigenous people.30

There was an element of truth, then, in the “lastness” of Indians in

Seattle. In the 1910s, anthropologist Thomas Talbot Waterman noted

that Seetoowathl, Ollie Wilbur’s relative with the crazy wife, was one

of the only indigenous people left in Seattle. In many ways, men and

C I T Y  O F  T H E  C H A N G E R S  /  9 7



women like Seetoowathl and Mandy Seattle were the last indigenous

generation. Certainly, there were people of indigenous ancestry who

continued to live in the city. Across Salmon Bay from Hwelchteed and

Cheethluleetsa, for example, several families of Shilshole heritage

lived in Ballard, and people with roots in communities such as Her-

ring’s House and Place of the Fish Spear could be found in other parts

of the city. In them, the so-called vanishing race carried on. But in terms

of indigeneity—which we might define by subsistence patterns, use of

traditional places, ceremonial practices, firsthand experience with the

pre-urban landscape, and, not insignificantly, the perceptions of

observers—the deaths and departures of Tleebuleetsa, Chesheeahud,

and the others did in fact mark a discontinuity in Seattle’s Native his-

tory. The first decades of the twentieth century did not spell the end of

Indian Seattle by any means, but they were the end of indigenous Seattle.31

During those same decades, indigenous knowledge of Seattle often

came to be located outside the city, on reservations like Muckleshoot

and Suquamish or in small enclaves like the Duwamish community at

Black River. When academics and amateur ethnographers went in search

of Native knowledge of the places that had become Seattle, they rarely

went to the city. Their lists of collaborators, in fact, read like shorthand

for the slow erosion of indigenous presence in Seattle. Waterman’s

informants Anne Seattle and Lucy Eells, living at Muckleshoot, both

had fathers who were born at Little Crossing-Over Place, the settlement

now buried under downtown’s King Street railway station. Julie Jacob,

born African American and abandoned as an infant on Ballast Island

before being adopted by Jacob Wahalchoo and his wife, shared her cul-

tural knowledge in her home on the reservation at Suquamish. So did

Jennie John Davis, the daughter of Chesheeahud. Local knowledge was

no longer local; understanding of indigenous Seattle could best be

obtained by getting out of the city.32

Meanwhile, for people whose indigenous ancestors had left Seattle

decades earlier, places in Seattle remained important: clam beds,

fishing sites, campgrounds. But just as urban landscape change brought

Billy Phillips and his wife to the brink of starvation, it would also erode

connections between outlying Native communities and indigenous

9 8



places within the urban fabric. In a 1994 interview, for example, Muck-

leshoot community member (but enrolled Puyallup) Art Williams, born

in 1913, described traveling to Alki Point during the summers of his

childhood. There, his parents would build a small timber and buckskin

shelter, and for two or three weeks, they and other families would har-

vest clams, mussels, geoduck, octopus, and salmon from Elliott Bay and

the Duwamish estuary. “All along, you’d see bonfires,” he told the inter-

viewer, “all along the beaches, where they cooked clams and do every-

thing.” Accompanied by drumming, songs, and stories, the annual trip

to Alki was a continuation of older seasonal rounds. Fishing and clam-

ming were only part of the action; the main event took place across Elliott

Bay, at the foot of James Street on the Seattle waterfront. There, Native

people would trade “whatever you got,” in Williams’s words: woolen

blankets and dried clams, camas bulbs and buckskins. For two or three

weeks, they would “have a big potlatch . . . everybody come there and

say goodbye to one another . . . ’til next year comes, and then have it

over again.”33

That was about to end. As Art Williams got older, the trips to Alki

Point and the Seattle waterfront became more difficult. As white Seat-

tleites began to build beach houses with names like Dewdrop Inn and

Bide-a-wee facing the beach at Alki, Indian encampments were less wel-

come. “No, no, no camping no more,” Williams recalled. “They said

no, no more camps. They wouldn’t let us.” Incorporated into Seattle in

1907, West Seattle had changed from an outlying community to an urban

neighborhood, leaving less and less room for Native encampments.

Urban growth and its attendant environmental impacts, meanwhile,

led to new conservation law. Indigenous people would bear the brunt

of these changes as well. State records pertaining to the arrest of Native

people for fishing in the Duwamish and on Elliott Bay no longer exist,

but Jennie Davis testified some years later that the Duwamish and other

local Indians had to stop fishing “or they will be arrested.” Indian agent

Charles M. Buchanan was particularly strident in his opinions about

the criminalization of indigenous fisheries on Puget Sound, especially

in urban places. “The Indians of this agency have donated to the white

man all of the great townsites of Puget Sound,” he argued in 1916. “No

C I T Y  O F  T H E  C H A N G E R S  /  9 9



Indian has given more—no Indian has received less!” He placed the

blame on “the stringent and harsh application to Indians of the State

game and fish laws . . . done under color of law.” Enforcement of these

unjust laws, moreover, led to real criminality, reducing Indians to “beg-

gary and theft.” By 1922, when Art Williams returned from the

Chemawa boarding school in Oregon, he and his family had to “sneak

around different places” to harvest fish and clams. They found, how-

ever, that shellfish harvests at Alki Point had dwindled, and Williams

attributed this not just to urban development and scapegoating laws

but to the fact that Indian people were no longer allowed to go there

simply to pray for the clams’ continued abundance. Indigenous stew-

ardship of the environment, with all its religious components, had been

sundered.34

And much more than clams had disappeared; urban growth had also

destroyed the numinous forces that had given many local places their

meaning. The story of Ballard’s early political history, for example, is

the story of residents struggling to keep each other’s cattle from foul-

ing the creek that was the town’s main water supply. To the Shilsholes,

that creek had once been known as Spirit Canoe after the power that

resided there, but by the early twentieth century the power was said to

have fled, likely offended by the feces and urine of the Bostons’ beasts.

By the early twentieth century, there were fewer out-of-the-way places

for spirit powers and the practices that accessed them to carry on unmo-

lested. Meanwhile, a Duwamish elder described to ethnographer John

Peabody Harrington the effects of urban development on a supernat-

ural horned serpent known to inhabit the Lake Washington shoreline

and once employed by some of the most powerful and feared shamans.

Harrington’s notes simply say that by the 1910s it was “gone, not there

now.” Around that same time, a boulder inscribed with shamanic power

figures on the West Seattle shoreline was buried under fill and concrete

foundations. In the late twentieth century, some Indian people would

return to sacred sites in Seattle, but during the years of the city’s most

rapid growth, at least some local indigenous people felt that urban change

had destroyed, dispersed, or submerged many of the landscape’s spir-

itual, and thus most fundamental, qualities.35

1 0 0



In fact, the primary place-story local indigenous people told about

Seattle in the early twentieth century was one of alienation and erasure.

Other informants recounted for Harrington what had happened else-

where in the city, contrasting indigenous places with their current con-

ditions. Of the firs at Little-Bit-Straight Point, where a settlement and

stockade had once guarded the mouth of the Duwamish River, settlers

had “cut them long ago,” and in their place stood the Rainier Brewery.

The nearby town of Place of the Fish Spear, meanwhile, now lay

beneath the Seattle Electric Company machine shops. And new calami-

ties always seemed possible; when construction of the Alki Playground

in West Seattle uncovered the remains of several smallpox victims in

1911, some local Indians were concerned that a new epidemic would

be visited upon the area. Together, these stories made up an indigenous

accounting of urban transformation, in which a new kind of changer,

men like R. H. Thomson and Watson the arsonist, had reworked the

creations of the original Changer. For people like Hwelchteed, who resis-

ted leaving Salmon Bay until the very end of his life, and for Art Williams,

who had never called Seattle home but who came there every year, con-

nections to Seattle’s indigenous landscape had been almost severed.36

This is not to say that people from reservations and tribal commu-

nities stopped coming to the city. As it did for most people living in

outlying areas, Indian or otherwise, the city offered services and ameni-

ties and jobs that were unavailable elsewhere. Parents brought children

from Suquamish to visit doctors in Seattle; Muckleshoot men and

women came to the city to shop. A Skagit shaman could get cataract

surgery in the city; Tulalip allottees could go to the courthouse to demand

land payments. And in a city still fueled by sawmills, canneries, and

shipyards, there was always the possibility of paid work. The new urban

landscape—the glitter of the department stores, the seediness of Skid

Road, the bustle of the waterfront—might have destroyed the indige-

nous landscape of horned serpents and herring runs, but it still

attracted Indian people, who engaged the city on Indian (if not always

indigenous) terms.37

For all their differences, Seattle’s indigenous and urban landscapes

were often closer together than they seemed. While one had appeared

C I T Y  O F  T H E  C H A N G E R S  /  1 0 1



to give way to the other in a dramatically short period of time, in real-

ity both existed simultaneously in the minds of many Native people.

Muckleshoot elder Florence “Dosie” Starr Wynn, for example, told an

interviewer about trips made to the city in the 1930s and about the

persistence of Seattle’s indigenous landscape in her grandmother’s

memory:

We went to the waterfront, and we went up to the public market, and we used

to go up there. And when we’d take her shopping, we’d go through that road

through Duwamish, that way. And she named all the rocks. The hills—well,

they’re gone now, because of blasting and new homes going in, and busi-

nesses. But they had names for every one of them rocks down there. . . .

Stories about those hills. All along that valley, there.

The place-stories Dosie’s grandmother told her were those of North Wind

and South Wind, of the dwarves that helped Spirit Canoe travelers, and

of lookouts posted on hills to warn of slavers from the north. The land-

scape might have been changed almost beyond recognition—the sacred

horned snake “gone, not there now”—but the memory of these things

remained vital for the descendants of Seattle’s indigenous people. In

1931 Suquamish elder Mary Thompson said it best, telling a Seattle Times

reporter that although she seldom visited the city named after her great-

grandfather, she remained connected to the place. “I always feel that I

own it somehow,” she said. Meanwhile, a small community of Duwam-

ish people continued to live within the city, blending in as far as out-

siders could tell but maintaining their own sense of themselves as a

people. Decades later, their story would resurface, and the transition

between indigenous and urban ecologies, represented by changes like

the Lake Washington Ship Canal, would be central to that story.38

And then there is the indigenous name for the city itself. When ethno-

graphers like Harrington and Waterman in the 1910s and Marian Wes-

ley Smith in the 1940s interviewed elders throughout Puget Sound, they

found that most did not refer to the city by the name chosen by Arthur

Denny and his pioneer compatriots. Instead, they used the name of the

indigenous settlement buried long ago under the sawdust from Yesler’s

1 0 2



mill. On the eve of the Second World War, almost a century after the

founding of Seattle, Little Crossing-Over Place continued to exist in the

hearts and minds of Indian people.39

T
he float house at Tideflats where Seetoowathl lived with

his unpleasant wife at the turn of the century did not escape

the Changers. The couple had struggled in the first years of

the twentieth century, as the dogfish oil industry collapsed with

the introduction of petroleum products. Some of their Indian neigh-

bors moved on to the reservations, while others passed away. Meanwhile,

the Duwamish River on which their home rose and fell with the tides

had changed dramatically. After all the dredging and filling and straight-

ening, they now lived on the last remaining natural bend of the lower

river. Relatives came less frequently; Ollie Wilbur and her parents had

stopped coming because they “didn’t care to go there anymore.” It might

have been that isolation, together with infirmity and the industrial land-

scape that surrounded them, that spelled the end. In the 1910s, Thomas

Talbot Waterman described Seetoowathl as “hale-appearing,” but that

would change very quickly. In the winter of 1920, Seetoowathl and his

wife starved to death. “He died, you know,” recalled his great-grand-

niece Ollie, “and they just cremated his body, you know.”40

The crazy woman and the old man who refused to speak English

had chosen to stay on the river, and that choice had cost them their

lives. The fact that two old people, Indian or otherwise, could starve

to death in Seattle in 1920 is an indictment of the failings of the Pro-

gressive Era. The city now had over 300,000 residents and had

achieved remarkable successes. Most notably, the tallest building west

of the Mississippi—the Smith Tower, completed in 1914—stood

within sight of the Duwamish, a testament to wealth, competence, and

confidence. From its upper floors, one might have been able to see the

curve of the river at Tideflats, but the Progressive ethos of reform,

charity, and order, for all its successes, could not make the cognitive

leap from skyscraper to float house. Then again, the Progressive Era,

which saw great leaps forward in medicine, social work, conservation,

and suffrage, was also the era of Jim Crow, the Alien Land Law, the

C I T Y  O F  T H E  C H A N G E R S  /  1 0 3



first Red Scare, and the disaster of Indian allotment. Why should Seat-

tle have been any different?

During construction of the Lake Washington Ship Canal, engineer

Hiram Chittenden had once written that critics of the canal disliked

such projects “simply because they destroy old associations . . . those

who have been familiar all their lives with certain conditions are natu-

rally loth [sic] to see them changed.” For many Indian people, the “old

associations” had been destroyed almost completely. In the decades

between the coming of the railroad and the Great Depression, Indian

agency in Seattle is hard to find. It is there, though: in the applications

for allotment, in the death vigil held near the university grounds, in

the “sneak fishing” on the Duwamish. These small acts would provide

tenuous links between the indigenous past and future reclaimings of

urban space by Indian people. Meanwhile, during the same decades

that indigenous Seattle was reaching its nadir, another kind of Indian

history was on the rise. In describing her kinsman’s house on the river,

Ollie Wilbur recalled that a number of the Indians living at Tideflats

were not kin of hers or of anyone she knew. They were what those who

still spoke Whulshootseed called by a name that meant something like

“from the surf ’s mouth.” They were from far, far away, and they had

come to make Seattle theirs.41

1 0 4


























6 / The Woven Coast

A
visitor to seattle in the summer of 1900 would have

been impressed. Where a town of fewer than four thousand

people had existed only twenty years earlier, a city of eighty

thousand now crowded the shores of Elliott Bay. A newly

commissioned army fort guarded the bluffs above West Point, a mas-

sive railroad and shipping terminal was under construction at Smith’s

Cove, and electric lights illuminated much of downtown, powered by

distant dams. More than forty labor unions represented workers in the

city, including the longshoremen who shepherded millions of dollars

in international commerce into and out of Elliott Bay. The Duwamish

River still curved chaotically toward the Sound, but its meandering days

were numbered; plans were already under way to transform it into an

organized channel of commerce. Even Ballast Island, where the refugees

from Herring’s House had come to protest seven years before, seemed

to reflect Seattle’s urban fortunes, growing each year as bricks, rocks,

and other detritus were added by ships from Manila, Honolulu, Val-

paraiso, San Francisco, and Sydney. Metropolis had arrived.1

But in 1900, it was not the people of Herring’s House who now

camped on Ballast Island. Instead, it was people from the Strait of Juan

de Fuca. These were S’Klallam people, thirteen dozen men, women,

and children who had come to the city from their homeland on the

northern shore of the Olympic Peninsula. Their canoes, and those of

other Native people from even more distant Native places, had inspired

some observers to dub Seattle’s waterfront the “Venice of the Pacific.”

S’Klallam people camped safely in the territory of the Duwamish: clearly,

the city’s Indian terrain had shifted.2

Meanwhile, several blocks away, on the site of Henry Yesler’s old mill,

1 0 5



a second kind of new Indian terrain existed. On a triangle of greensward

known as Pioneer Place Park, wedged in among the banks and hotels,

a massive Tlingit carving rose over flowerbeds and a neatly clipped lawn.

At its base, mythic ancestor Raven-at-the-Head-of-Nass anchored a series

of striking figures: a whale with a seal in its mouth, a smaller raven, a

mink, a woman holding her frog-child, and yet another raven carrying

a crescent moon in its beak. This was the Chief-of-All-Women pole,

carved to memorialize a woman who had lived and died a thousand miles

from Seattle. It was an unlikely candidate for the city’s first piece of public

art, but there it stood. According to one observer, it even made Seattle

unique, “the only city in the world which possesses a monument of this

character to a fast departing race.”3

The story of how canoes from the Strait of Juan de Fuca and a totem

pole from Alaska got to Seattle is the story of the city’s arrival as a regional

metropolis, of the linking of distant places to each other and to that

metropolis, and of the creation of a new urban story. Just as Ballast Island

was a physical manifestation of Seattle’s connections to distant ports,

Indian people and images in Seattle reflected the city’s new economic

and cultural boundaries, which by the twentieth century reached as far

north as Alaska. Indian canoes arriving on Seattle’s waterfront from far-

flung places heralded the creation of an urban Indian hinterland of

which Seattle was one nexus. Meanwhile, Seattle’s experience of regional

empire, spurred in part by the discovery of gold in the Klondike in 1897,

led to a new urban vocabulary that used Native imagery such as totem

poles to highlight the city’s new position as gateway to the North. Seat-

tle’s Indian hinterland stretched along a coast woven together by new

urban and indigenous connections, and through that new weaving, both

Native people and the city would be changed.

I
n august 1878, the Seattle Daily Intelligencer reported that scores

of Native men and women were camped at the foot of Washington

Street on their way to the hop fields of rural Puget Sound country.

Perhaps they were the people immortalized in Mr. Glover’s bird’s-

eye panorama of the city. If not, they were people like them. Above the

tide line, temporary shelters and dozens of canoes filled with personal

1 0 6



belongings turned the waterfront into a sudden and unmistakable Indian

neighborhood. The paper predicted that after three or four weeks earn-

ing “considerable money” from labor in the fields, the Indians “will then

return, on their way stopping at Seattle to spend the larger part of their

earnings.” The movement of working Indian people—and, not

insignificantly, their money—in and out of Seattle was becoming part

of the city’s urban calendar and a central facet of life in Native com-

munities far beyond Puget Sound. Canoes from Washington’s Pacific

coast, the islands and inlets of British Columbia, and as far north as

Alaska were more than just modes of conveyance toward economic

opportunity: they were vehicles in which Indian people traveled toward

a new identity crafted through their encounters with the urban.4

Long before hops and cities reoriented Native lives on the Northwest

Coast, indigenous people had come from great distances to visit Puget

Sound. In the 1990s, archaeologists working on the site of a new sewage

treatment plant at West Point in Seattle found two remarkable pieces

of carved stone, one worked from dark green nephrite and the other

hollowed out of light gray stone. These were labrets, ornaments that

had once pierced the lower lips of elite Native people; the green one

even bore scratches where it had rubbed against the teeth of its wearer.

They were at least three thousand years old, and their origins lay far to

the north; no societies south of the central British Columbian coast had

ever worn them. While the labrets are a mystery (were they worn by

men or women, slaves or invaders, spouses or traders?), they attest to

ancient voyages along the vast edge of a continent.5

Stories of such journeys come from shallower time as well. During

the same decades that Vancouver and Wilkes explored the Northwest

Coast for their empires, indigenous people with their own ambitions

were making thousand-mile journeys in forty-foot canoes to the places

that would become Seattle. Shilshole elders, for example, told one local

historian of raids by Stikine Tlingit from southeast Alaska; those

unable to escape into the backcountry around Tucked Away Inside were

either taken as slaves or killed, their heads thrown into Salmon Bay.

The Lekwiltok Kwakwaka’wakw of the northern Strait of Georgia had

earned a similar a reputation in Puget Sound by the 1820s, their raids

T H E  W O V E N  C O A S T  /  1 0 7



appearing in the oral traditions of both peoples. Even after non-Indian

settlement in Puget Sound, these northern Indians (described by set-

tlers as “northern British Indians” or even “British-Russia red-skins”

to distinguish them from local indigenous people) continued to make

forays into the inland waterways near Seattle, sometimes turning their

attentions to white schooners and farms.6

But in the late nineteenth century, the nature and frequency of Native

visits to Puget Sound and Seattle changed. Drawn by seasonal work in

the region’s burgeoning economy, Indian men, women, and children

began traveling huge distances, often every year, to Seattle and its out-

lying areas. As Puget Sound’s first large-scale agricultural commodity,

hops played the largest role in these migrations, but over time other

kinds of crops—berries, vegetables, herbs, flowers—demanded Native

labor. For tribal communities all along the coast, occasional forays into

Puget Sound became regular peregrinations. By the early twentieth cen-

tury, the city was a well-established stopover for Indian laborers whose

home communities ranged up and down the Northwest Coast.7

Canoes going to and from Seattle changed both their home com-

munities and the city. The most obvious effects were monetary: Indi-

ans fresh from the hop fields and other jobs injected large sums of money

into Seattle’s economy. One Seattle newspaper noted in 1879, for exam-

ple, that Native visitors brought “great trade” to the city’s merchants,

and that “between their calls going and returning they will leave sev-

eral thousand dollars in Seattle.” Native shoppers in Seattle quickly estab-

lished a reputation for shrewdness, with one paper referring to them

as “sharp, close traders [who] look upon the Bostons with a suspicious

eye.” According to some observers, Indians’ spending made them prefer-

able to other minorities in the city. One paper reported that they were

better than Chinese immigrants “as they spend the money they receive . . .

and keep it in the country, instead of hoarding it and shipping it to a for-

eign land, from whence no dollar returns.” While not on a par with tourist

dollars or large-scale capital investments—particularly in later decades,

as the urban economy reached metropolitan proportions—Indian cash

nonetheless helped to fill urban coffers.8

Things bought in Seattle could be used to maintain Native traditions

1 0 8



in the hinterland, as the purchase of material goods in Seattle and other

urban centers meshed with indigenous notions of prestige. One

observer, for example, noted that “it was a common thing to see sev-

eral sewing machines in one Indian house or half a dozen phonographs,

and beds and tables by the dozen but never used. . . . If by chance the

owner of the house should die, to ease his condition in the next world

all these household goods were piled upon his grave, often including

the very doors and window sashes of his house.” Goods procured in

urban places—phonographs and bedsteads as well as more mundane

resources like flour and coffee—helped maintain and even augment

indigenous institutions like the potlatch. Sometimes the potlatches,

important ceremonies in which Natives displayed their wealth, reaffirmed

their status, and cemented kinship and community ties, were even held

in Seattle. Orange Jacobs recalled one such event in the 1880s, when a

Canadian Indian named Jim gave away hundreds of dollars’ worth of

blankets, calico, suits of clothing, and “Indian trinkets” to dozens of

participants on the tidelands south of town. Even the journey itself could

be a display of status; Pacheenaht chief Charles Jones once boasted that

he had paddled from Vancouver Island to Seattle in a single day. The

urban experience did not necessarily erode indigenous traditions; it could

in fact strengthen them. This was perhaps especially true for Native

people whose homes were in British Columbia, where the potlatch was

outlawed beginning in 1885.9

Casting one’s lot with the vagaries of the American agricultural econ-

omy, however, brought risks for travelers and those they left behind.

One Canadian Indian agent noted in 1891, for example, that Seattle-

bound Tsimshians had “failed to obtain much labour, and realized but

little profit.” Likewise, Kweeha Kwakwaka’wakw Charles Nowell recalled

one season when he, his brother, and some in-laws stayed in Seattle

for only two or three days after learning that hops were “all burnt,” and

returned home virtually broke. Labor gluts and disasters like the hop

louse infestations of the 1890s could wreak havoc with Native fortunes.

In 1906, some unlucky Sheshahts from Vancouver Island were forced

to spend the winter digging clams and selling them in Seattle for mea-

ger returns because of losses earlier in the season. Meanwhile, migrants’

T H E  W O V E N  C O A S T  /  1 0 9



absences could leave their kin vulnerable on remote reserves: an agent

on eastern Vancouver Island reported in the late 1880s that Cowichan

elders faced hardship as younger relatives spurned local subsistence

activities to pursue wealth elsewhere.10

But perhaps the greatest challenge posed by annual migrations came

from disease. Economic vectors between Seattle and its Native hinter-

land were mirrored by biological vectors, pathways where contagion trav-

eled with the phonographs and cash. Those vectors had helped fuel

Seattle city leaders’ racist paranoia in the 1870s, but if the paranoia had

mostly ended by the last years of the nineteenth century, the continu-

ing effects of such diseases had not. In fact, the prevalence of measles,

tuberculosis, and other illnesses among Native travelers allows us to

locate them in the urban landscape. Death records for King County dur-

ing the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries show clusters of

Indian mortality among the tidelands and shanties near the old Lava

Beds. Canoes lay at the foot of Weller Street, for example, while their

owners and passengers died just blocks away. The diseases went home

with the survivors. Indian agents on Vancouver Island were especially

aware of the illnesses that struck communities whose members had

gone to town. In 1888, Agent Harry Guillod reported that many Kyu-

quot and Chickleset children had died of measles on the way back to

Vancouver Island from the Sound while the Hesquiaht, who had stayed

home, had been spared. Two months later, the province’s Indian super-

intendent reported that the same outbreak was now raging everywhere

on the British Columbia coast. Hundreds of miles from urban centers,

Native cemeteries bore the marks of diseases that blossomed in crowded

cities.11

Migration to and from Seattle had its more subtle costs as well, erod-

ing connections to indigenous places in the hinterland. Among the Tlin-

git, for example, the central element of social life, the kwáan, or clan,

was a map of sorts, a linkage between a group of people and a place

expressed through subsistence activities and oral tradition. Through rela-

tionships with urban places, however, these intimate connections

between people and place were shifting. Charlie Jim Sr., or Tóok’, a Hut-

snuwu Tlingit Raven who often came to the city, told a biographer that

1 1 0



in the early twentieth century he sometimes felt “like a man without a

country” because of his regular movements between southeast Alaska

and Seattle. For someone who defined himself in large part by his kwáan,

and thus his place, this was a telling statement. His story, likely not

unique, suggests that, while the coast was being woven together in some

ways, it was being sundered in others.12

For all its risks, though, migration to Seattle and Puget Sound gave

Native people a chance at independence and presented challenges to

federal Indian policies in both the American and the Canadian parts

of the Northwest Coast. Treaties with Washington State and the rules

of the reserve system in British Columbia allowed for the movement of

Native people off of reservations and reserves, but it often seemed to

agents that such travel undermined efforts to “civilize” Native people.

From the Makah Reservation, for instance, whole families headed to

the hop fields, leaving agency schools empty, Bibles unread, and les-

sons unlearned. Makah Daniel Quedessa wrote to a white friend in the

1880s that he would soon leave with his parents to go to pick hops, adding

that “I guess every one of the School childrens will go up to pick hops.”

Meanwhile, Canadian missionaries across the Strait of Juan de Fuca

found it “very up-hill work” persuading families to stay on the reserve

during the school year when work and wages beckoned from the south.

Native travel to Seattle thwarted the larger goals of national policies,

much as it had in earlier periods of Seattle’s history. As before, efforts

to define who belonged where rarely worked out as planned.13

For all the agents’ complaints, though, canoe trips to Seattle actu-

ally helped Native people integrate themselves into settler society. Few

extant sources indicate how Native people perceived places like Seat-

tle, but it appears that, for some, encounters with urban life inspired

new, cosmopolitan ambitions. It is likely that many found the material

abundance, social opportunities, and general spectacle of Seattle an excit-

ing change of pace. Many Native men and women may have agreed

with Tsimshian Arthur Wellington Clah, who simply called Seattle a

“great city” in his 1899 diary. Others seem to have aspired to an urban-

ity of their own; on Vancouver Island’s west coast, one sign of prestige

at the turn of the century was a home sporting bay windows and Vic-

T H E  W O V E N  C O A S T  /  1 1 1



torian fretwork, emulating houses seen in Seattle and elsewhere. The

urban experience left subtle marks on communities hundreds of miles

from the city itself, both augmenting traditions like the potlatch and

inspiring a new, cosmopolitan Indianness.14

Over time, the attractions of the city even inspired some Native people

to become longer-term residents, spending more than the summer

months in Seattle. In 1886, for example, a group of Kyuquot families

chose to winter over and dig clams to sell in the city. Meanwhile, an

Indian couple from an unidentified Northwest Coast community

worked as “fiery Baptist missionaries” in Seattle in the first years of the

twentieth century, attracted by the souls that needed saving on what

was left of the old Lava Beds. Among the Makah, living in Seattle for

varying lengths of time became a normal part of life in the 1910s. Neah

Bay was “almost deserted” in the summers as people went to the city

and the hop fields, and some did not come back at all. In fact, Seattle

had become so central to Makah economic life that Daniel Quedessa

lamented in 1915 that “I can not even go to Seattle for a trip. I can’t go

some place for week so I stay here [in Neah Bay on the Makah Reser-

vation] all the time. That’s why I dont make money. I always wishing

if I could go away and make little money.” For many of the Makah, Seat-

tle had become an indispensable part of getting by, and for some, it was

becoming a home in its own right.15

Coming to Seattle meant that Native people from the city’s hinter-

land sometimes came into contact with local indigenous people.

Suquamish elder Amelia Sneatlum, for example, recalled the time in

the early twentieth century when her family was camping on the beach

at Seattle and a Yakama man stabbed and nearly killed her father. At

the other end of the spectrum, Muckleshoot elder Art Williams described

friendly encounters with Native migrants on Elliott Bay, which were facil-

itated by the use of Chinook Jargon and, in later years, English. At the

same time, the erosion of indigenous communities in and immediately

around Seattle also provided openings for migrants from the hinter-

land. The Sheshahts who stayed in town to dig clams, for example, could

do so because many indigenous Duwamish families with traditional

rights to those beds had moved to area reservations or given up clam-

1 1 2



ming. The growth of one kind of Native presence in Seattle, then, existed

in a sort of inverse relationship with another kind of Native presence—

at least until the clam beds were destroyed altogether by urban change.16

Meanwhile, a new kind of urban Indian history was on the rise. As

Native people arrived in Seattle in canoes (and, more commonly in the

twentieth century, on steamers), they entered a city with a new vocab-

ulary. Throughout the city, totem poles and other Native symbols, drawn

from the very same hinterland places whence the travelers had come,

marked shop fronts and street corners. If the movement of Indian people

to and from the city had changed both the Native hinterland and its

urban center, the movement of Indian things had also changed both

places as well, providing a new iconography of urban empire. 

S
ometime near the close of the eighteenth century, a

Tlingit noblewoman of the Ganaxádi Raven clan, Chief-of-All-

Women, drowned in the Nass River while on her way to com-

fort an ill relative. After lengthy and heartfelt mourning rituals,

clan members in her community of On the Cottonwood on Tongass

Island in southeast Alaska hired a carver to commemorate her life and

her heritage. Drawing on ancient stories of Raven-at-the-Head-of-Nass

and other figures associated with her lineage, the carver produced a fifty-

foot cedar pole that was erected next to the clan’s longhouse. For more

than nine decades, the Chief-of-All-Women pole, with the dead woman’s

cremated remains inside it, reminded the Tongass Tlingit of Ganaxádi

origins and social standing.17

Then, in 1899, a group of men from Seattle—among them clergy-

men, land developers, and bankers—arrived at On the Cottonwood on

a ship chartered by the Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Coming ashore to see

the “totem poles” and longhouses of the Tlingit community up close,

they were particularly taken by the Chief-of-All-Women pole. Thinking

it would make a fine souvenir of their journey to Alaska—and later claim-

ing that the village was deserted—the men sawed through the pole at

its base, discarded Chief-of-All-Women’s remains, and floated the pole

out to their ship, breaking off the beak of Raven-at-the-Head-of-Nass

in the process.18

T H E  W O V E N  C O A S T  /  1 1 3



Several weeks later, on 18 October 1899, the Chief-of All-Women

pole was erected in Pioneer Place Park, a spot of sod at the heart of Seat-

tle’s first plats. “All day long people paused and gazed; went away,

returned and gazed again,” crowed the triumphant Post-Intelligencer, “and

said it was a great and wonderful thing and a grand acquisition to the

city.” In a fit of Victorian flourish, another observer gave voice to the

pole itself:

I am the only Civilized totem pole on earth,

And civilization suits me well 

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

While all the others of my kind

Are slowly settling on their stems

Among the salmon scented Silences,

Sequestered from the sight of man, 

Here in Seattle’s surging scenes

I stand, incomparable 

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

So here’s farewell to all my past

And welcome to the things that are;

With you henceforth my die is cast,

I’ve hitched my wagon to a star.

And by the Sacred Frog that hops, And by the Bird that flies,

And by the Whale and the Bear, I sunder all the ties

That bound me to the ancient creed which holds my people flat,

And I will be a Totem pole

That knows where it is at.

Abandoning its backward creators, the Chief-of-All-Women pole now

served a higher purpose: advertising Seattle. Where it was “at,” among

the city’s “surging scenes” and far from the “salmon scented Silences,”

seemed not only preferable but natural. Seattle knew where it was “at”

as well; at the dawn of the twentieth century, it was the gateway to a

new empire that stretched from its railroad stations and wharves, along

the rainy northwestern edge of North America, and into the high Arc-

1 1 4



tic. Just as Native people moved up and down the coast, Native objects

and images began to move as well, and both Seattle and its hinterland

were changed. Here was a city that highlighted its urban modernity by

telling stories about places far from the bustle, about silent places in

the distant wilderness over which it held sway.19

As early as 1870 the Alaska Times was being published in Seattle,

but it was the arrival of the steamer Portland in 1897 that truly hitched

Seattle’s wagon to the North’s star. Soon after the Portland hove to on

the waterfront with half a ton of Yukon gold on board, Seattle estab-

lished itself as a fulcrum in the economy and ecology of gold, a cru-

cible that turned raw yellow metal into cash, food, clothing, real estate,

patronage, and more. While other developments helped spur the eight-

fold expansion of the Seattle economy between 1895 and 1900

(steamship trade with Asia and South America, as well as increases in

commercial rail shipping to markets back East), the gold rush became

the dominant explanation for Seattle’s new international prominence.20

As the launching point for voyages to Alaska, Seattle became an entre-

pôt not just for yellow metal but for encounters with the Native peoples

of the North. Anthropologists had been working the coast for years,

but the massive migration of non-Indian people, diseases, technologies,

and goods into Seattle’s northern hinterland quickened the “scramble”

for Northwest Coast materials and gave rise to a salvage mentality among

scholars. Anthropologists came to document cultures that seemed on

the verge of extinction; tourists came in search of exotic Others who

called the northern wilderness home. Most of them came from Seat-

tle, particularly after its status as the commercial center of the gold rush

was clinched, and were encouraged along their way by guidebooks

printed by railroads, steamship companies, and Seattle’s own Cham-

ber of Commerce. Native people and things, along with the spectacu-

lar scenery of the Inside Passage, were the chief attractions of trips from

Seattle to Alaska. As early as 1890, naturalist John Muir described mobs

of totem-seeking tourists on the waterfront at Wrangell, Alaska. “There

was a grand rush on shore to buy curiosities and see totem poles,” he

wrote. “The shops were jammed and mobbed, high prices being paid

for shabby stuff manufactured expressly for the tourist trade.” And once

T H E  W O V E N  C O A S T  /  1 1 5



Seattle had established itself as the gateway city, tourists need not go

as far as Wrangell to purchase a piece of the North. Ye Olde Curiosity

Shop, opened in 1899 by J. E. “Daddy” Standless among the steamer

wharves of the waterfront and still in business today, became a nexus

of the trade in Native material culture and the greatest of dozens of

such emporia in Seattle. In addition to outfitting “Indian corners” in

private homes, the Curiosity Shop and its competitors helped fill the

American Museum of Natural History and the Field Museum; curio

shops were places where popular imagination, ethnographic impulses,

and urban ambitions joined. But the movement of Native things—such

as the miniature argillite totem poles, ivory shaman’s tools, and cedar

canoe models at the Curiosity Shop—from Seattle’s hinterland was made

possible by Native people. Just as Indian men and women met the

throngs at Wrangell’s wharves, they also worked at the heart of the trade

in Seattle. One such man was Sam Williams, a Ditidaht carver from

Vancouver Island. First coming to Seattle around the turn of the cen-

tury, Williams settled on the tideflats like so many other migrants, and

in 1901, his skills came to the attention of Daddy Standless. Over the

next four decades, Williams carved hundreds of miniature and full-size

totem poles for the Curiosity Shop. Several of Williams’s children and

grandchildren also carved for Standless, and a handful of his poles can

still be found at the Curiosity Shop.21

The Chief-of-All-Women pole, erected in Pioneer Place Park at the

height of the gold rush, was the most famous example of this migra-

tion of Native objects and imagery. It instantly became an icon of Seat-

tle’s promise and one of the “must-see” attractions of excursions to the

Northwest. In the April 1905 Journal of American Folklore, anthropolo-

gist John Swanton wrote, “Every visitor to Seattle, Washington, has been

attracted and more or less interested by the great totem pole that adorns

its main square.” As its image circulated around the globe on cartes des

visites, “Seattle’s Totem Pole” provided a frontierish frisson that set the

city apart from its competitors. Indeed, the Chief-of-All-Women pole

was all the more exceptional because of its urban backdrop. “This totem

pole is such a curious object!” wrote one observer to her Massachusetts

kin in 1901, “especially when seen right in the business part of the city

1 1 6



as ours is.” In 1907, temperance writer Agnes Lockhart Hughes cast

the pole as a zero-datum marker for the city’s growth:

For less than a decade of years this heraldic monument has gazed upon 

the many changes in its vicinity, and shortly, on all sides it will be overshad-

owed by the immense business structures now in [the] course of construc-

tion. Relentlessly the hands of a nearby clock mark the speed of fleeting

time . . . seemingly unmindful of the grotesque Totem Pole. . . . Its lips tell

nothing of its past, its ears are deaf to the roar of traffic around it, but its

eyes gaze down on the rapid progress of Seattle, the wonderful Queen City 

of the West.

For observers like Hughes, the pole in Pioneer Place linked the banks,

law firms, and other businesses of the city’s commercial district—many

of which fronted the park where the pole stood—with the goldfields

and other resources of the new Alaskan frontier. The fact that the pole

faced northwest was deliberate: a trophy of the gold rush boom, the

Chief-of-All-Women pole became a symbol of Seattle’s metropolitan

reach, and thus its modernity. Other imperial cities had created visual

languages to reflect their ambitions and the nature of their holdings;

Seattle had looked North and found a totem pole.22

Like Indian migration to and from Seattle, represented by canoes

on the waterfront, the hinterland represented by the Chief-of-All-

Women pole was manifested in comings and goings. A canoe cap-

sized in the Nass River, inspiring the carving of a pole. A chartered ship

dropped anchor at Tongass Island, its passengers hungry for a trophy,

while steamboats spilled tourists onto wharves in search of Alaskan sou-

venirs. Railcars emptied at Seattle stations, to be filled again with masks

and rattles on their way to eastern museums. Lines on tourist brochures

linked Seattle with Alaskan places like Wrangell and Sitka. Urbanites

took the trolley downtown to see a pole erected, and postcards traveled

the world, naming Seattle Gateway to the North and City of Totems.

Through routes of travel and commerce that linked places like On the

Cottonwood to places like Pioneer Place Park, Indian images came

unmoored and could serve new masters.

T H E  W O V E N  C O A S T  /  1 1 7



This was a powerful new place-story, literally: the creation of Seat-

tle’s new urban vocabulary carried with it new power relations. Within

months after the Chief-of-All-Women pole was taken in 1899, for exam-

ple, the Tlingit people of On the Cottonwood accused eight of the Post-

Intelligencer expedition members of theft. Seeing little cause for concern,

the “Committee of Eight” filed a mock suit against themselves, bring-

ing Lake Indian Chesheeahud from his home on Lake Union to play

the role of plaintiff. That ploy was dropped when a federal grand jury

indicted the committee, but the presiding judge soon dismissed the

indictment after a dinner held in his honor by committee members.

Drafting a retroactive bill of sale, the committee paid $500 to the people

of Tongass Island and then sat back to bask in their newfound notori-

ety. The Ganaxádi Ravens and the Seattleites had been connected to

each other in new and unexpected ways, in an urban warp and indige-

nous weft that bound up a continent’s vast edge.23

T
he klondike gold rush symbolized Seattle’s imperial

education; the Alaska-Yukon-Pacific Exposition was its coming-

out party. Held in 1909 on the shores of Lake Washington, the

AYPE trumpeted Seattle’s status as “Queen City of the Pacific,”

and its massive Beaux Arts–style buildings, made mostly of plaster, stood

as symbols of “the awakening of the Pacific, and transforming of the

backyard of the world into the front.” The neoclassical White City con-

fections impressed visitors, but so did the presence of “Jap-Alaskan”

architecture and other Indian-inspired spectacles, especially on the

amusement strip known as the Pay Streak. “The red man of the Pacific

Coast is present everywhere,” announced the Seattle Times: “His crude

art, always symbolical and sometimes hideous, glares and grins at the

visitor from the red and dun-colored totem poles marking the way to

the Pay Streak; the carved tribal history of Alaskan tribes upholds the

beautiful ‘Tori’ arch of the South Gate, and figures in many of the post-

cards sold by dealers in such wares.” Beyond the Pay Streak, Indian

things filled the displays of the fair: Seattle photographer Edward S.

Curtis’s photogravures, S’Klallam ceremonial objects, even human

scalps recalling the “red man of J. Fenimore Cooper” in the Govern-

1 1 8



ment Building’s Dead Letter Department. Virtually every exhibit

included some sort of ethnographic display, and the message was clear:

these Indians were our people—not in the sense of being us, of course,

but in the sense of being ours. Like other world’s fairs, the AYPE was

intensely didactic, brazenly ambitious, and thoroughly racist.24

For all the power of Curtis’s photos and the titillation of scalps and

“grotesques,” it was the display of actual Native people that most capti-

vated the attention of Seattle fairgoers. The most popular attraction of

the entire exposition was the Eskimo Village on the Pay Streak, where

“expert reindeer men, skin-boat builders, ivory carvers and the best look-

ing women,” most of them from Siberia, served as living examples of

primitivism as they undertook everyday activities in their plaster “frozen

north.” Meanwhile, Indian schoolchildren from Tulalip were put on dis-

play to show “what the bureau of Indian affairs has accomplished for

the Indian people during the last few years.” And just outside the fair-

grounds at the White City Amusement Park, Cheyenne, Arapaho, and

Lakota men attacked stagecoaches day after day as part of a Wild West

Show, only to be rebuffed every time by white gunslingers. Whether as

harmless primitives, emblems of assimilation, or violent barbarians,

Native people, like Native things, were used by fair organizers to artic-

ulate a clear message: witness our realm, see our burdens.25

It is all too easy to see Native people at the AYPE as mere captives

to Seattle’s imperial fantasies. To some extent, they were. But at the same

time, Native people had their own reasons to go to the fair. Two days

after arriving in Seattle to tend reindeer at the Eskimo Village, for exam-

ple, Iñupiat Oliver Angolook decided to return to his community near

Nome. When the agent who had procured his services confronted him

at the wharf, Angolook was reported to respond, “Got money. Pay my

own fare.” Indeed, Angolook’s salary was reportedly enough to “keep

an entire family in affluence through several seasons”—and ironically,

it provided the means for him to leave Seattle altogether. Similarly, many

Indian Wild West Show participants saw such performances as a way

to visit faraway places while earning money for displays of traditional

skills like horsemanship. Still another performer, the “Eskimo belle”

known as Columbia, reaped a more unique reward; after winning the

T H E  W O V E N  C O A S T  /  1 1 9



AYPE beauty contest (trouncing several white competitors), the young

Labrador Inuit woman received a lot in one of Seattle’s new suburbs.

Like hop fields or curio shops, the AYPE was an opportunity. Mean-

while, Skhandoo, a Chilkoot Tlingit shaman, wowed audiences with

dances and ceremonies at the Eskimo Village alongside other Tlingits

of the Chilkat, Hoonah, and Taku bands. He had once earned great

wealth thanks to the Otter spirit that gave him power to heal, harm,

and see far-off events, but after two prison terms for deaths caused by

his ministrations, he found himself destitute until landing the job at

the world’s fair. For Skhandoo, the AYPE served two purposes: it

allowed him to continue performing the work for which he had received

prestige from both Tlingit and white observers, and it provided him

with a living. For a man in Skhandoo’s tenuous position, participation

in the AYPE may have been the best of few options. For all these Native

people, coming to the fair, like coming to the city more generally, often

simply made good economic sense.26

Seattle’s fair was also a place to play out long-standing rivalries

between indigenous communities. In early 1909, for instance, fair organ-

izers received a telegram from Harry Hobucket, a Quileute from Wash-

ington’s outer coast, noting that the rival Makah were having trouble

acquiring a gray whale to bring to the fair and offering to bring one on

behalf of the Quileute. While exposition organizers appear to have

declined the offer, the proposal suggests that some Native people saw

the fair as an opportunity to shame old enemies in a new setting with

a huge audience. Several weeks later, a challenge came from Chief Taho-

lah of the Quinault and his sub-chief Pe-ka-nim of the Hoh to Indians

everywhere, “and especially to their old enemies,” to join in a canoe

race at the fair. But such competitions, like the canoe races on 6 Sep-

tember, “Seattle Day,” could also facilitate new alliances among tribal

communities. As teams from Washington’s Skokomish and Tulalip

reservations and British Columbia’s Lyacksun and Penelekuts reserves

attracted thousands of spectators to the shores of Lake Union, they both

drew white approval and helped craft a shared Native identity.27

At least one Native group came to Seattle explicitly to resist white

authority. These were the Tsimshian of Metlakatla, a Christian settle-

1 2 0



ment founded in 1862 by the missionary William Duncan, who sought

to isolate the Tsimshian from outside influences. Many Tsimshian people

saw this isolation as a barrier to opportunity and began to rebel against

Duncan’s authority, and by 1909, various American governmental bod-

ies had gotten involved as Tsimshians and others complained to the

Department of Interior and the Alaskan educational authorities. While

the Metlakatlan contributions to the fair—a brass band and a ladies’

auxiliary known for its needlepoint—were portrayed as the products

of civilizing efforts, several Tsimshian fairgoers were in fact trying to

oust the man seeking to civilize them. The auxiliary president, for exam-

ple, was Mrs. Bertrand Mitchell, whose husband was in the midst of a

campaign against Duncan, writing to Alaska school commissioners, “We

are slaves here. We are getting poorer all the time and Mr. Duncan is

getting richer. What is the matter with the government?” Meanwhile,

William Pollard, assistant leader of the brass band, had also vocally

opposed Duncan’s rule. Needlepoint and rousing marches, then, were

a way for Tsimshian people to join the outside world. Coming to the

AYPE was an act of resistance.28

Finally, Native people also came to the fair as full-fledged spectators,

taking in the urban spectacle like everyone else. The Post-Intelligencer

reported that Indian observers at the canoe races, for example, “put the

organized yells of some rah, rah boys completely to shame.” Meanwhile,

several Lakota Wild West Show performers and their families, “decked

out in all the picturesque attire of the cow country—sombreros, chaps

and all the rest of it,” went to the Pay Streak one afternoon for fun and

encountered a group of Flathead Indians. “To the uninitiated it looked

as if a real war whoop was the next thing to be expected,” winked the

Times, but “then the chief of the Rosebuds gave a guttural command

and his braves lined up in single file and slowly approached a similar

file which formed on the instant among the Flatheads. For fifteen min-

utes the warriors of the two tribes shook hands silently. Not a word was

passed between them and there was never a smile until the ceremony

was over and then they fraternized as if they had come from the same

reservation.” The two groups then went to visit the Eskimo Village, where

they showed the Siberians, the Tlingit shaman Skhandoo, the “Eskimo

T H E  W O V E N  C O A S T  /  1 2 1



belle” Columbia, and the gawking crowds “what a war dance is like when

danced among friends.” Then the Lakotas and Flatheads finished the

day with a ride on the Ferris wheel.29

We cannot know what the Indians on the Ferris wheel thought of

the Eskimo Village, the Baby Incubators, the Upside Down House, or

the Temple of Palmistry. Native people probably found the AYPE awe

inspiring, offensive, hilarious, and perhaps even boring. But they may

also have seen deeper meanings for themselves—a Wild West Show as

a mark of prestige, an invitation to the Pay Streak as a gesture of friend-

ship, a “war dance among friends” as a step toward a shared Native iden-

tity. As the center of a vast regional empire, Seattle had become an

important venue in which to pursue old and new Native ambitions. Not

only did canoes represent Indian migration to and from the city, but

when paddled in AYPE races, they also signified the development of a

shared Native identity. Totem poles represented not only Seattle’s impe-

rial claims on the North but also the people who traveled to the city in

pursuit of economic independence, social status, or a good show.

While on its surface a spectacle of urban dominance and white racial

superiority, the Alaska-Yukon-Pacific Exposition also reflected the

ambitions of its Native participants, who came from the far ends of Seat-

tle’s hinterland on their own terms.

O
ne of the most striking photos in any of Seattle’s 

archives dates from the first years of the twentieth cen-

tury. Taken by an unnamed photographer in front of the

Frederick and Nelson Department Store at the corner of

Second and Madison, it captures a Native woman, likely Makah or Nuu-

chah-nulth, sitting against the building’s stone façade and selling bas-

kets, blankets, and other handicrafts. She looks ahead and slightly

down, avoiding the gaze of a well-dressed white woman who leans over

her with an I-assume-you-can’t-speak-English-so-I’ll-talk-louder expres-

sion. A third woman of indeterminate race, possibly Indian, watches the

exchange as busy urbanites rush by, among them a particularly dowdy

older woman who seems to observe the scene with disdain. It is a moment

1 2 2



of encounter, where women of different races and classes came together

for a moment on the streets of the city to haggle over a basket. 

Weaving was not just a metaphor for what happened on this coast.

Like canoes and totem poles, baskets were both product and symbol of

Seattle’s Indian hinterland. Throughout the late nineteenth and the early

twentieth century, sidewalk encounters between Indian vendors and

white customers were a part of everyday life in Seattle. One 1905 news-

paper article might have been describing this very photo: “Uptown, on

First and Second avenues, many an important corner was given a touch

of nature by the presence of a wrinkled old squaw, leaning her toil-

bent back against the supporting columns, while around are arrayed

canoes and baskets and mats, in reckless profusion, all ready to be traded

for the money of whites.” Travel correspondent Nina Alberta Arndt

described the ubiquity of similar “touches of nature” in the Overland

Monthly three years later, noting that Indian women and their wares

could be found “upon the steps of the principal banks, on the sidewalks

of the business thoroughfares, or again . . . in the aisles of some depart-

ment store.” Local newspapers identified Indians “squatting in char-

acteristic attitudes with ‘hiyu iktas’ [many things] spread around them”

as “one of the most common sights along the pavements of Seattle . . .

intrud[ing] itself on the vision of every pedestrian.” Meanwhile, “more

eager seekers” of curios could visit Native encampments on filled land

south of the city. No need to go to Neah Bay, Prince Rupert, or Sitka;

the hinterland came to Seattle, bringing touches of distant nature to

the heart of urban America. And, in fact, most of the basket vendors

on Seattle streets at the turn of the century were not from Puget Sound.

According to the Post-Intelligencer, many were Makah or Nuu-chah-nulth

from Vancouver Island (and her baskets’ designs suggest that the woman

in the Frederick and Nelson’s photo was as well). An agent among the

Sheshahts at Port Alberni on Vancouver Island confirmed that many

Seattle vendors were his charges: “during the winter months the

women often engage in the manufacture of baskets . . . which, being . . .

a distinct novelty, are readily disposed of in the larger towns in the state

of Washington.” Like canoes and totem poles, baskets connected Seat-

T H E  W O V E N  C O A S T  /  1 2 3



tle street corners to Native communities hundreds of miles from the

city.30

Eastern tourists to Seattle often saw a basket or other Indian “curio”

as the requisite souvenir of a trip to the city, meaning that a Sheshaht

basket could easily end up in Boston or London or St. Louis. Indeed,

for some Native vendors, eastern customers were preferable. Accord-

ing to one Seattle paper, “an Indian curio-shop manager at the corner

of a Seattle block can tell an Easterner from a Western product. He knows

the ‘cheechaco.’ A sale with an Eastern tourist is easily landed, and prob-

ably a hundred percent on the real value is assessed at that.” The sale

of baskets, then, drew attention to the boundaries not just between white

and Indian but between westerner and easterner, captured best in the

Chinook Jargon word cheechako, literally meaning “newly arrived” but

also glossed as both “easterner” and “greenhorn.” Baskets linked places

to each other but also differentiated places as well, distinguishing Seat-

tle and its people from their eastern counterparts. Here was a city where

Native nature could be acquired without venturing into actual wilder-

ness, and where urban America had an Indian edge.31

Gullible easterners were not the only collectors of baskets, however.

Throughout Seattle, in places socially, if not physically, distant from the

tideflat encampments and street corners, white women added baskets

and other items to “curio corners.” A Post-Intelligencer article describ-

ing the best collections in town reads like a clipping from the society

page: the wives of mill owners and other civic elites all had extensive

collections. Carrie Burke, married to a judge, even had a new wing added

to her house specifically for her Indian collection. In fine homes on the

hills of Seattle such as the Frye mansion at Ninth and Columbia, upper-

class white women used the collection of Indian things to mark their

own social status. Just as totem poles spoke of Seattle’s metropolitan

status, cedar bark and maidenhair fern from Vancouver Island could

help a banker’s wife in Seattle tell stories about privilege and power and

showed how tightly the urban center and indigenous periphery were

woven together along the coast that Seattle dominated.32

This was a new kind of imbrication, different from the landscape

Mr. Glover had hinted at with his 1878 bird’s-eye sketch of Seattle. The

1 2 4



treaties had been signed for fifty years, the indigenous towns had long

been burned, Kikisebloo had died a decade earlier—and yet Indian

people remained a highly visible part of Seattle’s urban landscape. But

instead of the Whulshootseed word yiq, these people might have used

other words to describe the process of imbricating themselves into Seat-

tle’s landscape, taken from their own languages: words for “weaving”

like the Quileute tsikbay, the S’Klallam ekwel, and the Kwakwala yepá,

or words for “worrying into tight places” like the Tlingit dik’eek’ or the

Nuu-chah-nulth pithlqa. And as the indigenous languages spoken in

Seattle had changed, so had the city’s civic vocabulary. Croaking amid

the urban din of Pioneer Square, Raven-at-the-Head-of-Nass told a place-

story of transformation, but he was not alone. Like Mrs. Burke displaying

her baskets, Seattle’s civic leaders had found new ways to talk about the

city and its past. Inspired by the memory of urban conquest and the

creation of a regional hinterland, the city’s leaders set about crafting a

new set of place-stories that cut to the very heart of what it meant to

be white, American, and of this place.33

T H E  W O V E N  C O A S T  /  1 2 5


























7 / The Changers, Changed

I
n 1866, seeathl, seattle’s namesake, died at Place of Clear

Water, the community from which Jacob Wahalchoo had once gone

out in search of power below the waters of Puget Sound. He was

buried on the Port Madison Reservation across Puget Sound from

Seattle, not far from the enormous main longhouse at Place of Clear

Water that settlers called Oleman House or Old Man House, meaning

“worn-out house” or “venerable house” in Chinook Jargon. The death

of Chief Seattle garnered little official attention in the city that bore his

name; no Puget Sound newspapers announced his passing, and while

settlers who knew him surely noted his death—perhaps some even

mourned—Seeathl seemed to fade quickly from prominence in Seat-

tle’s civic consciousness. A few years later, government agents burned

Oleman House, seeing it as a hindrance to their civilizing mission. Mean-

while, the descendants of Seeathl and their fellow Suquamish tribal

members tended his grave; occasionally a white visitor from off the

reservation would place American flags there in memory of the

indigenous leader’s contributions to the birth of Seattle. But more often,

the madrone-ringed cliff-top cemetery, facing Seattle across Puget

Sound, remained a quiet place.1

In 1911, the scene at Seeathl’s grave could not have been more dif-

ferent. Hundreds of visitors from Seattle were on hand, enjoying the

late August weather and the U.S.S. Pennsylvania’s brass band follow-

ing a welcome from the local Indian agent. Seattle mayor George W.

Dilling, jurist Thomas Burke, and University of Washington history pro-

fessor Edmond S. Meany each gave an address describing Seeathl’s hos-

pitality toward the first settlers, and patriotic songs were sung in

English and Chinook Jargon. As souvenirs, each guest was given a pho-

1 2 6



tograph of the grave courtesy of printer (and future mayor) Ole Han-

son. This was Chief Seattle Day. “The sentiment of a Chief Seattle Day,

in commemoration of the Indian chief who befriended the white man

in the early days of the Puget Sound country,” wrote one participant,

“has appealed strongly to many of Seattle’s prominent citizens.” Those

citizens made good on their sentiment; by the 1930s, Chief Seattle Day

included special Black Ball Line excursions, picnicking, and saltwater

swimming, while plans were under way to construct a baseball diamond

and tennis courts next to the cemetery. Place of Clear Water, once a fusty

impediment to civilization, had become a pilgrimage site for those wish-

ing to commune with their urban indigenous past.2

Arthur Denny might have been Seattle’s founding father, but Seeathl—

generous toward the settlers at Alki, powerfully articulate during treaty

negotiations, and unswervingly loyal during the “Indian War”—was its

patron saint. Nowhere was this more obvious than in the bad poetry

inspired by visits to his grave. One particularly florid example, penned

by Professor Meany himself and using the old Whulshootseed name

for Puget Sound, was read at the 1911 pilgrimage to Suquamish and

later to the University of Washington’s graduating class of 1912:

Peace be with thee in thy honored grave,

O, Chieftain, as pilgrims we lovingly come,

Drawn to a shrine by Whulge’s cool wave;—

Suquamish, sad fragment, in fir-girdled home.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Slowly the smoke from the log cabin curled,

From hearth of white stranger near wilderness shore,

Hearth and a home at the edge of the world,

With bold Saxon faith in a hut’s open door.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Raging with anger, demons of hate,

The howling foes fought through the battle’s long day.

Chieftain, O, Chieftain, blest was our fate!

Thou stoodst like a rock in our tempest strewn way.

Sweet be the flower, O, child, that you bring,

T H E  C H A N G E R S ,  C H A N G E D  /  1 2 7



And pure be the prayer that you Heavenward send,

Soft be the song as wild robins sing,—

A shrine in the grass by the grave of our friend.

Seemingly the noblest of savages, Seeathl was the Indian benefactor

to a Saxon city; the place-story of the man and the city that bore his

name relied on two premises: a notion of a vanishing race and a belief

in inevitable Anglo-American racial supremacy.3

Other would-be poets made the connection between Seeathl and Seat-

tle even more explicit, often apostrophizing the person and the place in

the same stanza as California resident Florence Reynolds did in the 1920s:

Oh! City so marvelously fair of face,

You were born of a noble Indian race,

And to honor their chieftain you were given his name.

Oh! Seattle, great warrior of deathless fame—

You have a monument that ever will stand,

A tribute of Love to your character grand;

A city of beauty that is fast growing great—

A “Wonder Spot” in a wonderful State.

For Reynolds, a grave paled in comparison to a city itself as a marker

of Seeathl’s life. Similarly, white Suquamish resident T. M. Crepar, a

contemporary of Reynolds, suggested an even closer connection

between man and metropolis:

There’s a people that’s proud of the story,

There’s a city that’s proud of its name,

Like the Chief he was in his glory,

For Sealth and Seattle’s the same.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

’Neath a whitened cross and mound of sod,

The bones of Chief Seattle lies [sic];

While across the bay, where once he trod,

Seattle towers to the skies.

1 2 8



Included in a brochure sold to gravesite visitors by Princess Angeline

Souvenirs, the poem’s claim that “Sealth and Seattle’s the same”

reflected popular linkages between the man and the city. Talking about

Seeathl and Seattle in the same breath—using an Indian to explain the

city—seemed only natural. And, in fact, nature was at the core of this

particular place-story, which expressed longing for the lost world of the

“first Americans.”4

Stories about Chief Seattle had little to do with the real man named

Seeathl. In a pattern that would come to dominate urban discourse over

the twentieth century, the city’s namesake was often little more than a

character from central casting, and the circumstances in which his image

appeared rarely had much to do with actual Indians, typically reveal-

ing far more about the portrayers than about Seeathl. And, in fact, the

symbolic resuscitation of Seeathl in the early twentieth century was but

one example of the ways in which white Seattle residents used Indians

and Indian imagery to tell urban place-stories. More than appropria-

tions of Indian symbols—a time-honored American tradition—these

stories were also ways to work out concerns about a changing city, and

as such, they reflected the conflicting ambitions and anxieties of Seat-

tleites. They were stories about place: about what had happened here,

about who belonged here. As white Seattle turned to Indians to tell urban

place-stories, it was clear that the “Changers” had also been changed

by the experience of urban conquest and the transformation of this place

called Seattle.

O
n 17 july 1912, a new kind of Indian arrived in Seattle.

Like so many who had come before on their way to the

hop yards or the tideflats, he came from the north. But

there was something different about this Indian. Perhaps

it was that he arrived aboard the Portland, the same auspicious ship that

first brought Alaskan gold to Seattle. Perhaps it was his dress: rather

than the plain pants and shirts that most Native men wore, he sported

a Chilkat blanket and the tall headpiece of a Tlingit noble, abalone and

copper and yellow cedar announcing an ancient lineage. Perhaps it was

the presence of the Fox and the Davis, twin U.S. Navy destroyers that

T H E  C H A N G E R S ,  C H A N G E D  /  1 2 9



flanked the Portland as it entered Elliott Bay, or the thousands of Seat-

tleites gathered on wharves and rooftops, blowing whistles to greet him

and cheering as calliope music filled the air. What made this “Indian”

most different from his predecessors, though, was that he was not an

Indian at all and no newcomer. Underneath the mountain-goat wool

and cedar headdress were the business suit and balding pate of George

Allen, Pacific Northwest manager of the National Surety Company of

New York. On this day, however, Allen was no run-of-the-mill insur-

ance executive: he was Hyas Tyee Kopa Konoway—“Great Chief of Every-

thing” in Chinook Jargon—and he had come to Seattle to potlatch.5

Between 1911 and 1914 and again in the 1930s, Seattle’s premier urban

festival was the Potlatch. Like the Alaska-Yukon-Pacific Exposition

(AYPE), the Potlatch drew on symbols of the city’s northern hinterland

and trumpeted the unique virtues that assured a great future for Seat-

tle, its residents, and its investors. More than just another example of

public relations, though, Seattle’s Potlatch festival was also a way for a

certain class of Seattleites—specifically, the city’s new commercial elite—

to tell stories about the city and its history. Called a “triumph of sym-

bolism” by one observer, the Potlatch appropriated Native imagery to

create a regional vision of civic development. In telling stories about

the places that had been linked to Seattle through its imperial networks,

Seattle’s Potlatchers crafted a new narrative about what it meant to be

not just in this place but in this place that dominated other places: in

the premier city of the Northwest Coast.6

Seattle’s Potlatches, like the AYPE before them, were indicative of

the heated competition among Western cities in the early twentieth cen-

tury. While Seattle’s regional dominance was largely a fait accompli by

the first Potlatch in 1911, the urban West remained a volatile place, where

the fortunes of cities could still be won or lost. Potlatch organizers sought

to cement Seattle’s position by creating a signature event, “all that the

Mardi Gras is to New Orleans; all that La Fiesta is to Los Angeles; all

that the Rose Festival is to Portland.” But why call it Potlatch? To high-

light the city’s modernity, why did festival promoters choose a Native

tradition as their leitmotif ? The answer centers on the question of wealth

and on the idea of a civic generosity that offered the promise of pros-

1 3 0



perity to all those who lived in Seattle and its hinterland. That an Indian

ritual could best articulate this vision made perfect sense to Potlatch

promoters:

To the Indian of the Northwestern water reaches [Potlatch] means a feast to

which all of the tribe are bidden and whence they return to their tepees laden

with gifts. 

Seattle has adopted the Indian name and applies literally the Indian defi-

nition. It spends $200,000 or more upon its annual festival, and offers it, as

free as its Northwestern air, to whomsoever may fare this way.

No feature of the whole delightful celebration is offered at a price, for The

Potlatch is not established for profit. Rather it is an annual thank-offering for

a prosperity that seems perennial; for such beauties of climate and nature as

have nowhere on earth their parallel.

Potlatch promoters, then, cast themselves as humble “chiefs” generously

bestowing the fruit of civic and ecological wealth upon the people of

Seattle and their guests.7

Their choice not only served the message of the festivals but also

expressed a long-standing fascination with the potlatch among non-Indi-

ans. Identified by outsiders as a trademark cultural element of the North-

west Coast, “potlatch” was in fact a constellation of diverse practices

used by indigenous people all along the northwestern edge of the con-

tinent as a way to manage social, economic, and spiritual relationships.

In Puget Sound, for example, the practice of sgweegwee, from the Whul-

shootseed word for “invite,” linked elite families, their resources, and

their spirit powers over great distances through the public performance

of a spiritually sanctioned sharing ethic, often on occasions such as funer-

als. As one elder said in the 1910s, sgweegwee both made a wealthy per-

son’s name “high” and made it “go all over the place.” This notoriety

brought responsibility; Tulalip elder Gram Ruth Sehome Shelton

(Seeastenoo) pointed out that the primary purpose of the practice was

to “keep up the poor,” to maintain social cohesion through sharing.8

Puget Sound potlatches, however, were overshadowed in the public

eye by those held further north. Marked by more lavish ritual per-

T H E  C H A N G E R S ,  C H A N G E D  /  1 3 1



formances, the public destruction of wealth, and the pageantry of danc-

ing societies, the potlatches of the Kwakwaka’wakw and other north-

ern Northwest Coast peoples fascinated academics and the public alike

and inspired a vast scholarly and popular literature. Fascination, how-

ever, was tempered by colonial revulsion at the seeming profligacy of

Indian society, expressed in the de jure repression north of the U.S.-

Canada border and in de facto repression south of it. In Seattle, though,

potlatch became the inspiration for appropriation. To borrow Gram Shel-

ton’s words, Seattle’s urban Potlatchers would use Native symbolism to

make the city’s name high and to make it go all over the place. Here,

then, was an event that represented yet another weft of the woven coast,

showing how completely Seattle’s urban identity had been transformed

by encounters with its indigenous hinterland.9

It did not start out this way. The first Potlatch, in 1911, used Klondike

imagery: the presiding figure was King D’Oro, the avatar of golden

wealth, who arrived on the Portland—always the Portland—with a ret-

inue of hoary prospectors and rambunctious dancing girls. The following

year, though, D’Oro was succeeded by Hyas Tyee Kopa Konoway. The

brochure for the 1912 festivities described this new incarnation:

Seattle’s Potlatch is unique, for it is based upon and is true to the rich tradi-

tion and history of Puget Sound and the Alaskan coast. Every pageant, every

spectacle, is colored with the original pigments. Its principal pageant is a line

of a thousand totem poles; its emblem is an Alaskan grotesque; its “patron

saints” the Whale, the Crow, the Seal, the Bear and other quaint and startling

crests of the native of the Northland.

This was, in effect, the AYPE’s appropriation of “Indian” images metas-

tasized citywide. The “Alaskan grotesque,” inspired by the totem poles

of both Seattle and Alaska, was the Potlatch’s mascot, known as the Big

Bug. Simultaneously an emblem of the festival and an object of racist

derision, the Big Bug was a regional cousin to Sambo, drawn not from

the imagined plantations of the South but from the Northwest Coast

of popular imagination. The Big Bug’s nearer kin were everywhere in

Seattle during Potlatch: the Chanty Tyees quartet (“the singing chiefs

1 3 2



of the Seattle Press Club”) sang “Chinook choruses” for Hyas Tyee Kopa

Konoway Allen during his official tour of the city, which including mak-

ing “good medicine” over the new liner Potlatch at the Seattle Construc-

tion and Dry Dock. Across town, three dozen young men performing

the “Totem Pole Dance” as part of the play The Alaskan, written by Joe

Blethen, son of the owner of the Seattle Times, proved a far greater suc-

cess than the sourdoughs and sad old King D’Oro. Upon Hyas Tyee

Allen’s ritual departure, the Times observed that “ever after Seattle will

look to the Potlatch for an Indian chief and not for a king or queen as

high ruler.”10

The Times’s rejection of royalty suggests that the Potlatches were dem-

ocratic, or even populist, in their conception. Indeed, they were—

designed as participatory spectacles, the events brought Brahmin and

lowbrow together in a unified civic identity. But for all the nods to gen-

erosity and philanthropy, it was Potlatch organizers who gained the most

from civic potlatching, and they did so through an organization that

stood at the core of urban power: the Tilikums of Elttaes. Making their

official debut at the unveiling of a newly painted Chief-of-All-Women

pole in the fall of 1911, the Tilikums (“friends” in Chinook Jargon; Elt-

taes is Seattle spelled backward) included the most powerful men in

Seattle. During the 1912 Potlatch parade, for example, one of the high-

lights was “Chief Skowl’s War Canoe,” crewed by some thirty Tilikums.

Among them were Hyas Tyee Allen’s insurance industry colleagues, as

well as bankers, attorneys, a Presbyterian pastor, the Seattle postmas-

ter, and staff from both the Times and the Post-Intelligencer. The canoe

also carried J. C. Marmaduke, general manager of the New Washing-

ton Hotel and the Alaska Building; Colonel William T. Perkins, an exec-

utive with the Northern Exploration and Development Company, the

Alaska Midland Railroad, and the Northern Securities Company; Clyde

Morris, president of Nome-based General Contractors and the Arctic

Club; and Joshua Green, president of the International Steamship Com-

pany. Called “the livest of the live wires” in Seattle, these Tilikums had

made fortunes from the city’s hinterland, whose images their friends

at the papers now used to sell the city. So perhaps civic potlatching was

not about generosity after all.11

T H E  C H A N G E R S ,  C H A N G E D  /  1 3 3



Soon after their appearance, the Tilikums became one of the largest

civic organizations in Seattle. A competition among their three com-

ponent “tribes” in 1913, for example, brought in 1,547 new members,

bringing the total to 2,588 Tilikums, a significant portion of the city’s

white, middle- and upper-class men. Their induction ceremony

involved the climbing of a totem pole, and tongue-in-cheek gossip of

human sacrifice circulated through town, a reminder of the fascina-

tion with rumored cannibalistic rites among Northwest Coast peoples.

“Playing Indian” was a well-established American pastime and had

always expressed a wide range of political and cultural notions, but if

the Tilikums tried to look like Indians, they behaved more like their

white counterparts in fraternal organizations throughout the country.

Concerned—at least on the surface—with more than simply making

money, the Tilikums also sought to create a new moral climate in the

city. During their inaugural year, for example, they erected a totem pole

downtown that literally spelled out the values of the Tilikums. A far

cry from the Chief-of-All-Women pole at the other end of the down-

town, this one stood atop seven steps, each engraved with a virtue:

Energy, Loyalty, Tradition, Truth, Ability, Equality, and Success—all

spelling Elttaes. For all its gaiety, the work of the Tilikums was also a

moral project, its apparent confidence belying deep-rooted concerns

about modern urban life and the reforming impulses of the Progres-

sive Era.12

The work of the Tilikums was also a historical project. The 1912 Pot-

latch parade, for instance, was a wheeled chronology of Seattle’s impe-

rial past, its place-story cast in crepe and cardboard. First came a float

belonging to a “shaman,” who used rattles to clear “evil spirits” from

the parade route, followed by the Hyas Tyee’s own float of walruses,

ravens, and golden cornucopias representing the North’s abundance.

Then came the Tilikums themselves, some wearing papier-mâché

bear, eagle, and whale masks and others dressed as totem poles, with

horns braying and drums pounding in “the way in which the Indians

of the North called together the chieftains.” Next came a Native pot-

latch scene complete with slaves and giant feast dishes, followed by Russ-

ian Alaska: a miniature replica of the Orthodox church at Sitka and

1 3 4



“Russian priests, Cossacks and Indian slaves.” Last, but certainly not

least, came the American period, represented by a huge eagle perched

on a map of Seward’s purchase, a re-creation of Chilkoot Pass with a

regiment of sourdoughs, and lastly the Home Government float, “a patri-

otic conception of what the future holds for Alaska.” Looking north to

articulate Seattle’s urban future, Potlatch organizers expended little

energy on the local past: Chief Seattle, the pioneers at Alki, and other

figures and events from Seattle’s pre-imperial history rarely appeared

at Potlatch. This was a story about place, and the place in question was

the salmon-scented silences, gold-strewn Arctic creek beds, and totem-

poled villages of Seattle’s hinterland—not the lands and waters upon

which Seattle had been built.13

The kind of place-story the Tilikums told had everything to do with

the kind of men they were, and with the kinds of experiences they had

had with both cities and Indians. Most members of the Tilikums of

Elttaes were cheechakos, people who had arrived during Seattle’s period

of rapid population growth that began in the 1890s. Few of them had

experienced Seattle Illahee. For them, the city had always been a place

of banks and steamships and railroads and tall stone buildings, all con-

nected to Alaska and the North Pacific. To be fair, Potlatch—which, after

all, began as Alaska Day—was never really about Seattle’s history in

the first place. A glorified street party and public-relations campaign,

Potlatch was an escape from the past, created by men with little inter-

est in reliving a history few of them had known firsthand. At the same

time, convincing residents, visitors, and investors of Seattle’s current

and future greatness required the creation of a historical trajectory—

a story for the city. And, in a sense, the Tilikums’ version of Seattle’s his-

tory was a local story; in the crowded world of twentieth-century urban

competition, Potlatches and totem poles and tribes could provide the city

with a unique urban identity among its rivals. But their definition of place

was a new one: as the Northwest Coast’s greatest metropolis, the hinter-

land had for the Tilikums become part of Seattle’s local terrain.

The Tilikums might have escaped the local past, but they could not

escape the global present. The 1913 and 1914 Potlatches resembled that

of 1912 in all the important ways—totem poles lining the streets,

T H E  C H A N G E R S ,  C H A N G E D  /  1 3 5



Tilikums in their war canoes, and the Big Bug leering at the throngs—

but Seattle’s biggest festival became increasingly entangled in events

in the broader world. The 1913 Potlatch was marred by running battles

between enlisted men and the Industrial Workers of the World, and as

the world embarked upon the Great War in 1914, Potlatch was scaled

back to only four days and received only subdued press coverage. In

fact, the 1914 Potlatch would be the last for two decades. The festival

was revived again in 1934 to bolster the spirits of a suffering city, thanks

to a new generation of Tilikums with their own Hyas Tyee Kopa Kono-

way, tribal chieftains, and shamans. By the Aviation Potlatch of 1941—

the last Seattle Potlatch, as celebration gave way once again to war—

images borrowed from Seattle’s experience with empire, and versions

of history that emphasized the regional over the local, had come to

seem like natural expressions of Seattle’s past. Although the Tilikums

had been responsible for creating this new sense of the local, based in

their own lived experiences in a regional metropolis, they did occasionally

venerate local history. Even in the years when Potlatch was not held,

the Tilikums participated in other urban ceremonies, throwing their

weight behind both Chief Seattle Day and commemorations of the land-

ing of the Denny Party at Alki Point. And when the men who dressed

as totem poles, who shook Tlingit rattles and spread cannibal rumors

about themselves, came together to remember these turning points

in the local past, they came into contact with another group of Seat-

tleites who told a very different place-story but who also used Indians

to do it.14

T
he tilikums of elttaes told one kind of urban story

in the early twentieth century; pioneers told another. As the

“live wires” that powered the dynamo of urban growth, the

Tilikums used Indian imagery to sell the city, but pioneers and

their descendants used Indian imagery to express ambivalence about

the losses attendant to that growth. Potlatches were optimistic festivals

of promotion, while pioneer stories were sentimental markings of the

passage of time. The two had different purposes: one to drum up atten-

tion in the noisy marketplace of civic public relations, the other to pre-

1 3 6



serve local heritage and revisit fading memories. The Tilikums looked

to the future, while the pioneers gazed longingly into the past. What

they had in common, though, was that both told stories about Indians

to give shape to the history of the city. To craft their place-story, pio-

neers used accounts of local indigenous people to commemorate their

own lives in the city’s lost landscapes and, in doing so, cast themselves

as a “vanishing race” in their own right. The Tilikums were not the only

white people playing Indian in Seattle. 

In 1938, the same year that the Tilikums dragged the Big Bug through

the city for a “Potlatch of Progress,” Seattle pioneers and their families

gathered at the Stockade Hotel at Alki Point. While Potlatches were about

extravagance, hyperbole, and celebration, the gathering at Alki was some-

thing quite different. “The blazing logs crackling in the fireplace,” noted

a Seattle Post-Intelligencer observer, “imparted an air of authenticity and

quiet corroboration to the ceremonies which were simple but heartfelt.”

The guest of honor that day was Rolland Denny—an infant when his

parents and their cohort landed on 13 November 1851, the last living

member of the Denny Party, and, as such, the only surviving link to

those hallowed events. Denny’s presence also made Seattle unique; in

his address to the group, Mayor Arthur Langlie pointed out that Seat-

tle was one of the few cities where one of the original founders still

lived—a backward-looking kind of boosterism. (Seattle’s uniqueness

in this regard was to last only a few more months: Rolland Denny was

dead by the following year’s gathering.)15

This was not the first such gathering. For nearly half a century, early

Seattle settlers, like their counterparts in other Western places, had been

coming together to commemorate and commiserate. The Society of

Washington Territory Pioneers—“pioneer” defined as someone who had

arrived prior to the indigenous uprising of 1856—was incorporated in

Seattle in 1872, with Arthur Denny, Henry Yesler, William Bell, and

Henry Van Asselt among the founding members. It merged with the

larger Washington Pioneer Association in 1886. From the outside, the

group’s annual meetings, usually held in Seattle, seemed almost fune-

real. Except for quaint anecdotes of settler life—a litany of hapless Indi-

ans, runaway horses, and jokes about mud—the reunions seemed like

T H E  C H A N G E R S ,  C H A N G E D  /  1 3 7



a deathwatch. A Seattle newspaper described one such proceeding in

the 1890s:

Charles Prosch . . . read his annual report as secretary, which was interesting

and of pathetic interest, especially when we have the names of those recently

dead. The pathos of this was heighted [sic] when, in response to the reading

of the roll call, the answer several times given from those present was, “He 

is dead,” these being the names of those who had gone, but of whose death

Mr. Prosch was not aware.

The paper then enumerated the dead by name: thirty-seven for that year,

including Henry Yesler. Press accounts of pioneer reunions, which typ-

ically included page after verbatim page of members’ reminiscences,

highlighted the fact that the generation that had settled Seattle, along

with the way of life they represented, was fast disappearing before the

onslaught of modern urban life. Pioneer stories were a way to talk about

urban change and offered a counterpoint to the enthusiastic promo-

tion of boosters like the Tilikums of Elttaes.16

Arthur Armstrong Denny set the precedent; if he is the “father of

Seattle,” then he should also be known as the father of Seattle pioneer

malaise. In the first published history of the city—Pioneer Days on Puget

Sound, printed in 1888—Denny was the first to express anxiety about

the urban transformations taking place around him:

It is now thirty-six years since I came to Puget Sound, and I am more and

more impressed with the fact as each succeeding year rolls by that the early

settlers of the country will very shortly all have crossed over the river and be

soon forgotten, for we may all concede the fact that we shall be missed but

little when we are gone, and that little but a short time; but when we have met

the last trial and our last camp fire has died out some may desire a knowl-

edge of such facts as we alone can give.

Here was another kind of crossing in the crossing-over place of Seat-

tle: between two kinds of Bostons, to use the old Chinook Jargon term

for the Americans. In one particularly petulant passage, Denny penned

that 

1 3 8



it is a common occurrence for parties who have reached here by the easy

method of steamer or railway in a palace car, to be most blindly unreason-

able in their fault finding, and they are often not content with abusing the

country and climate, but they heap curses and abuse on those who came

before them by the good old method of ninety or a hundred days crossing 

the plains.

Denny made a clear distinction between his generation and the bur-

geoning tide of cheechakos, many of whom would go on to become mem-

bers of the Tilikums of Elttaes. He became increasingly dejected in his

public musings about the passing of his generation and the ascendancy

of Seattle’s new civic society; in an 1890 interview with historian Hubert

Howe Bancroft, for example, Denny lamented his own obsolescence and

seemed to look forward to what he called “crossing over.” Even the phys-

ical evidence of his role as founder of the city had disappeared; in 1892,

the remains of that first log cabin at Alki were razed, despite Denny’s

efforts to save it. Denny might have been the father of Seattle, but he

seemed surprisingly lost in the city’s modern incarnation.17

Denny may have been the first—and the most pessimistic—Seattle

pioneer to articulate this anxiety over modern urban life, but he was by

no means the last. Major J. Thomas Turner, who had first come to Seat-

tle in the 1850s, noted in his 1914 reminiscences that “times have

changed,” not unlike the North American landscape. “There are no more

Rocky Mountains,” he wrote, “no more Indians, no more buffalo, and

the Great Plains have disappeared. Come to think of it, were there ever

any, or were [sic] their existence only an iridescent dream?” Meanwhile,

Charles Kinnear, after describing scenes of 1870s Seattle in his own

memoirs, ended with the acknowledgment that “this was in those long

haired Siwash Indian days on what is now the city’s main waterfront,

and the like of it cannot be seen here any more.” Similarly, Edith Sander-

son Redfield mourned the passing of Seattle’s “wilderness,” its “virgin

shore,” and the race of “Redmen” who lived there in a 1930 poem:

All, all are gone, the men, tepees

E’en gone the trickling streams, the trees.

T H E  C H A N G E R S ,  C H A N G E D  /  1 3 9



Seattle now in pride surveys

Its ports—its buildings—railroads—ways,

Where money comes and money goes;

Whose right supreme? Who cares? Who knows?

Turner, Kinnear, and Redfield each linked their history to specific places

lost to urban development, and filled those places with remembered

Indians.18

As pioneers told stories about Indians and nature to measure what

had been lost, they produced a place-story that challenged the one told

by the Tilikums, and they knew it. Pioneer poet Francis Henry, for

instance, had written in 1874 about the “pleasant condition” of the early

settler who was no longer the “slave of ambition” and who found a new

life in the Northwest surrounded by “acres of clams.” Some years later,

Henry felt compelled to pen a bitter sequel:

Some say this country’s improving,

And boast of its commerce and trade,

But measured by social enjoyment

I find it has sadly decayed.

In the pioneer days on the Sound,

When the people had little to wear,

And subsisted on clams the year round,

We’d hearty good fellowship here.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Not only our friendly relations

Are dropped for the worship of gold,

But the solid backbone of the country

Is recklessly bartered and sold.

The poem continues with complaints about logging, the commercial

harvest of those sacred clams, and other emblems of industrial Puget

Sound. That Henry used gold as a metaphor for the lack of “friendly

relations” in the new, metropolitan Seattle was no accident. He and his

pioneer compatriots were crafting an urban story that directly challenged

1 4 0



the one promoted by the Tilikums in the Potlatch festivals. Instead of

a story in which the city’s northern hinterland—and the wealth that

had sprung from it—was the driving force, pioneers crafted a story in

which Seattle’s origins lay in a close-knit community set in a nigh-Edenic

landscape.19

The local press also became involved in this clash of urban histo-

ries. In 1913, just before the start of the third Potlatch festival, a writer

for the Patriarch complained that “publicity has developed into a sys-

tem in the present day. That which is not unworthy of publicity is con-

sidered, by the public, to be not worth notice.” The writer then listed

all the civic holidays in Seattle—including Tilikums’ Day and Boost-

ers’ Day—before pointing out that the “Hegira” of the pioneers had noth-

ing to do with gold and that “theirs was no feather-bed Pullman car

luxury, such as is now enjoyed by those insolent ‘chee charcos’ who pre-

sume to treat them with patronizing condescension.” The tension

between Potlatch parades and pioneer reunions, then, reflected a much

deeper conflict between the cheechako and the pioneer generations and

the social orders they each represented. Some pioneers had benefited

from Seattle’s metropolitan status; in fact, many of the founding fam-

ilies had become important members of the civic and commercial elite.

But in the new cities of the West, as historian David Wrobel has shown,

pioneers’ political and economic power was usually slight—even if their

cultural and moral status was not—and their accounts of the past con-

trasted sharply with the efforts of boosters to imagine places like modern

Seattle into existence.20

As more and more of Seattle’s first settlers died, it fell to their chil-

dren and grandchildren to keep the pioneers’ place-story alive. Not sur-

prisingly, the Denny clan was at the heart of things. In a series of

enormously popular books, Emily Inez Denny (the daughter of David

and Louisa Boren Denny) and her second cousins Sophie Frye Bass and

Roberta Frye Watt (the granddaughters of Arthur Armstrong Denny

himself ) equated Indians, nature, and the pioneer way of life more

explicitly than their predecessors ever had. Denny’s 1909 family mem-

oir Blazing the Way; or, True Stories, Songs, and Sketches of Puget Sound

and Other Pioneers is filled with passages in which the first white woman

T H E  C H A N G E R S ,  C H A N G E D  /  1 4 1



born in Seattle grieves for a time when “our play-grounds were the brown

beaches [and] the hillsides covered with plumy young fir trees.” The

playground was made all the more wonderful by the “friendly advances”

of Native children, who “in their primitive state . . . seemed perfectly

healthy and happy little creatures.” All this would be swept away by the

inexorable tide of progress:

To the few of our pioneers who are left and who were once the barefooted

boys and girls who played the roads that are now First and Second Avenues

the past seems like a beautiful dream, wherein people of another world dwelt;

the red man with his picturesque garb of blankets and beads; the pioneer in

his buckskin hunting blouse and coon skin cap; the sailors from white winged

ships, and the jolly Jack tars from the old man-o-war.

Denny’s “beautiful dream” contrasted starkly with the urban landscape

she now saw around her.21

Denny’s kinswomen Sophie Frye Bass and Roberta Frye Watt were

brought up with tales of Seattle’s village period and, like Denny, told

stories about Indians to talk about Seattle’s metropolitan transforma-

tion. Bass in particular used changes in the urban landscape to distin-

guish between the Indian past and the urban present: “Third Street with

its neighborly homes, beds of pansies and mignonette, shade trees,

picket fences, along with the lum-me-i (old woman) and her micka tickey

clams (Do you want to buy some clams) is of yesterday, while Third

Avenue with its hurrying throng, its roar of traffic and brilliant lights—

is of today!” She described the deaths of indigenous people like Kikise-

bloo and the city’s massive engineering projects in the same sentence;

she mourned the time before conservation laws, when local settlers could

come home with bags full of game. To talk about urban change, it

seemed, required talking about Indians. Watt followed a similar path;

in writing of her uncle Rolland, for example, she cast the Indian and

urban as antonyms:

His life has spanned the years from the Indian cayuse to the automobile,

from the Indian canoe to the airplane. He has seen Seattle grow and change

1 4 2



from one roofless cabin in the wilderness to a city of towering buildings; he

has seen the winding Indian trails give way to straight and paved streets; his

ears have heard the cry of the cougar, the chanting of the medicine man—

and the voice of the radio.

In fact, in lamenting the loss of the pioneer way of life, with its roman-

tic scenery and encounters with Indians, the Denny women and other

pioneers created a framework in which Indians and cities seemed as

though they were mutually exclusive. Just as “pioneerness” seemed

impossible in twentieth-century Seattle, so too did “Indianness.” Some

even went so far as to equate themselves with the Indians who peopled

their stories. In describing the passing of the settler generation, Bass

described the factors that had led to the dispossession of many real local

Indians—in particular, large-scale urban engineering—as if she and

her ancestors were a vanishing race as well. And when her family home

burned in the 1870s, she recalled feeling as though “I could say with the

Indians when they were driven from their homes, ‘chad-quid-del-el’

(‘Where is my home?’),” using a Whulshootseed phrase to express the

terror of homelessness. In Bass’s urban story, pioneers practically were

Indians.22

The Denny family writers mourned the effects of urbanization—

in particular, the perceived loss of community, freedom, and close-

ness to nature—and used stories about Indians to do it, but they rarely

spoke of the processes by which indigenous land had become Seattle.

For example, none of the women mentioned the 1866 petition that

had prevented the creation of a Duwamish reservation near Seattle—

a petition their fathers, uncles, and grandfathers had all signed.

Instead, they emphasized the “incalculable injury, outrages, indigni-

ties, and villainies practiced upon the native inhabitants by evil white

men.” Like their ancestors, Watt, Bass, and Denny saw Indian-white

hostilities as the fault of the “wrong” kind of settlers, whitewashing

both their own past and Seattle’s urban history. Avoiding the con-

nections between urban founding, Native dispossession, and metro-

politan dominance, the creators of pioneer place-stories absolved

themselves of responsibility for both the indigenous past and the urban

T H E  C H A N G E R S ,  C H A N G E D  /  1 4 3



present. It wasn’t us, they seem to protest. It was somebody else, the squaw

men or those damned cheechakos.23

D
espite the contrasting place-stories they told, and

the real differences those stories represented, the Tilikums

and the pioneers had many things in common. One of those

things was Edmond S. Meany. A University of Washington his-

torian, Meany played a critical role in documenting the local past, often

in collaboration with pioneer societies, but also participated actively in

the civic boosterism and cultural borrowing of the Tilikums. Meany con-

sulted with Broadway High School students on a historical pageant that

stretched from Vancouver’s voyage to the creation of the Ship Canal and

the Smith Tower, and he was one of the lead organizers of the AYPE,

ensuring that the University of Washington would benefit from the

development of the fairgrounds. He advised Tilikums on the “proper”

meaning and use of the term “potlatch” and regularly answered letters

inquiring about “Indian names” for young-businessmen’s clubs, high

school yearbooks, real-estate developments, and vacation homes. Meany’s

life and work blurred the distinctions between Potlatcher and pioneer,

academic and booster, archivist and appropriator.24

Beyond the tireless Professor Meany, the Tilikums and the pioneers

had something else in common. Together, they crafted Seattle’s most

powerful place-story, in which something called the Seattle Spirit, born

in the founding at Alki Point, triumphed over both nature and Native

people. This story was transmitted most explicitly on the anniversary

of the Alki landing, known as Founders Day. While Founders Days in

the nineteenth century had been reserved observances, by the twenti-

eth century they had become urban spectacles, second only to the Pot-

latches, joining memories of Indian “depredations” to calls for a

renewed civic consciousness and grafting local stories onto national nar-

ratives. In reenactments and other rituals, Seattle’s “Pilgrims” were not

just founders of one northwestern city but players in a triumphant drama

of civilization-versus-savagery that had begun at Plymouth Rock. Every

November, Seattleites made their city’s place-story and their nation’s

place-story one and the same.

1 4 4



One of the first large public observances of Founders Day came in

1905. Hundreds gathered at the corner of First and Cherry, the site of

the blockhouse where settlers had cowered during the indigenous attack

on the town in 1856, to witness the installation of a plaque commem-

orating survivors of the “Battle of Seattle.” Pioneer attorney Cornelius

Hanford gave the keynote address, describing in vivid detail the “san-

guinary struggle.” While noting that only a few settlers had been killed

in the uprising, Hanford pointed out that “it was an earnest war, and

waged for the purpose of expelling or exterminating all of the white

people.” But the pioneers had persevered, eventually allowing landscapes

locked in Native possession to achieve their full potential:

Necessity, which is natural law, justifies the exercise of power of dominant

races to occupy and use the land for the purposes for which it is adapted. . . .

The Caucasian race acquired North America, partly by purchase and partly 

by conquest of the native inhabitants, who, as occupiers of the land failed 

to use it as God intended that it should be used, so as to yield its fruits in

abundance for the comfort of millions of inhabitants.

For Hanford, and likely for many in the audience that day, the connection

between indigenous resistance and urban development was clear: the

former had almost ended but ultimately justified the latter, and it was

the land, this place, that joined those two stories. In later years, Han-

ford would hone this logic. In his 1924 subscription history Seattle and

Environs—along with books by the Denny clan, part of Seattle’s historical

canon—he wrote that the attack stemmed from Indian resentment of

a “stronger and more enlightened people.” In the end, Native envy had

faltered before the Seattle Spirit, which had existed “from the time when

the founders landed . . . intangible as the souls of men and yet a real

force, giving community identity distinct as the individualities of per-

sons.” The birthplace of Seattle, then, was located both at Alki Point

and in race war.25

Some observances of Seattle’s birthday were held in public places

like the corner of First and Cherry; others were held in private homes

where old friends gathered to share their memories. One such gather-

T H E  C H A N G E R S ,  C H A N G E D  /  1 4 5



ing took place in 1914 “in a proud old house on the top of First Hill,

where the ceilings are high, and the roof is mossy, and the stairs are

square, and the light comes through the windows in rainbow patches.”

This was the home of Vivian Carkeek, one of the éminences grises of

Seattle society. He was a pioneer; in fact, he had been born in a water-

front house built on the place where, back in 1862, David Kellogg had

watched Bunty Charley’s initiation into a Duwamish secret society. As

founders of the Seattle Historical Society and with links to Seattle’s vil-

lage period, Carkeek and his peers crafted a genteel vision of the past.

But there was also a darker side to that history: among the teacakes and

crinoline at his party could be found “an Indian costume or two for grim

reminder.” For all their gentility—or, rather, because of it—pioneers

saw themselves as noble survivors of the violent tensions that had dom-

inated Seattle’s first years. One of Carkeek’s friends wrote, for exam-

ple, that “as ever the case from Massachusetts Bay to Puget Sound the

white and red man go to war.” Linking Seattle’s creation to that of the

nation, pioneers saw their city’s foundations laid in the inevitability of

racial conflict and in the moral fiber that had ensured American vic-

tory. From Pawtuxent to the Little Crossing-Over Place, the story

seemed the same.26

This vision of civic and national origins was not limited to the pio-

neers. Pioneers and Potlatchers alike told stories about interracial vio-

lence as a way to remind modern Seattleites of the travails of their

forebears. Abbie Denny-Lindsley, one of Arthur and Mary Denny’s

daughters, cautioned in 1906 that if modern urban residents could

“awaken from their uneasy slumbers some night and find Seattle as

she was forty-five years ago, they would think it a pipe dream and feel

for their scalp locks.” That same year, attorney and civic busybody W. T.

Dovell—a candidate for future Tilikum membership if ever there was

one—echoed Denny-Lindsley’s sentiment, contrasting the softness of

twentieth-century city life with the grim realities of the frontier. “Where

in those days the stranger, who struggled to these shores, found no

warmer welcome than that accorded by the lurking savage who coveted

his scalp,” Dovell said in an address later printed in the Washington His-

1 4 6



torical Quarterly, “he is now received into the abiding place of luxury

and wealth.” And at a 1938 pioneer reunion, Mayor John Dore warned

the younger people present that “the race is getting soft [but the] pio-

neers lived hard. It would be well if you children could understand the

hardships these people went through.” Certainly, there were other Seat-

tle Spirit stories: the lost railroad-terminus battle with Tacoma in the

1870s, the imposition of law and order during anti-Chinese violence

in the 1880s, and the struggle for Alaska gateway status in the 1890s.

But it was the Indian challenges of those first years that had the most

power and that would continue to reverberate for much of the twenti-

eth century.27

That power sprang from the resonance between local place-stories

and the national narrative. American thinking about the frontier, best

articulated by historian Frederick Jackson Turner at the 1893 world’s

fair in Chicago, linked the belief in a national character shaped by the

frontier experience to concerns about the fate of a nation whose fron-

tier had just “closed.” Just as Mayor Dore worried about the loss of the

Seattle Spirit, Americans in general wondered who they were without

the twin threats of Indians and wilderness. Meanwhile, the Indians in

Seattle’s stories also looked familiar: Seeathl was the noble savage par

excellence, assuaging the guilt of conquest through hospitality and

prophecy; the Big Bug and other icons of Potlatch reflected fascination

with the exotic and, ultimately, the laughable and primitive; and the Seat-

tle Spirit drew on the long history of American fear in which the igno-

ble savage, with his tomahawk and shrill war cry, skulked in the dim

forests of the imagination. The creation of stories like these had

become a national pastime. Like countless new local historical societies,

Grand Army of the Republic reunions, and reenactments at Plymouth

Rock, Seattle’s Potlatches, pioneer gatherings, and Founders Days were

part of what historian Michael Kammen has called a new civil religion

of historical observance. Stories about Indians created meaning in mod-

ern America. They established pioneers’ social status in a wealthy new

metropolis, they voiced dissent regarding environmental and cultural

change, and ultimately, they justified urban conquest. And in the years

T H E  C H A N G E R S ,  C H A N G E D  /  1 4 7



leading up to the Second World War, Seattle’s place-stories went largely

unchallenged, even by Native people themselves.28

D
u r i n g t h e y e a r s t h a t the “Changers” transformed

Seattle’s indigenous and urban landscapes and crafted civic

place-stories using Indian images, few Native people resis-

ted either development in explicit ways: the 1893 protest by

refugees from Herring’s House on Ballast Island was a rare exception.

Certainly, indigenous people had their own place-stories of the city’s

growth—Chesheeahud’s comment about “too many houses now,” for

example—but those stories were almost never told in public. Instead,

Native men and women often participated in the events through which

white place-stories were transmitted. They were there at the 1911 Pot-

latch, paddling a canoe against the University of Washington’s crew

team. (The Indians lost, proving yet again, according to the Post-

Intelligencer, that “the red man and his handiwork could be no match

for the white man and his skill.”) They sometimes came to pioneer gath-

erings; Suquamish elder Jennie Harper, for example, was brought across

Puget Sound to sit at the head table during Rolland Denny’s final reunion

at the Stockade Hotel. And in 1936 Snohomish elder Harriet Shelton

Williams unveiled the new official city seal—a suspiciously Roman-look-

ing profile of Chief Seattle—on Founders Day, while her father, Tulalip

chief William Shelton, told stories about Seeathl in Whulshootseed, Chi-

nook Jargon, and English. At events like these, indigenous people’s par-

ticipation seemed only to confirm the civic story. Meanwhile, Native

people from Seattle’s hinterland, lacking the authority that being local

bestowed, had even less of a voice.29

Even at Chief Seattle Day celebrations, held on a reservation, Native

people were active participants in observances that told stories serving

white urban interests. Beginning with the first Chief Seattle Day in 1911

and continuing through the 1940s, the Suquamish were gracious

hosts to hundreds of visitors from the city, decorating Seeathl’s grave,

coordinating massive clambakes, playing the bone game, and enter-

taining with “quaint old Indians [sic] songs.” In formal speeches, hered-

itary chiefs and other tribal leaders spoke of Seeathl’s generosity, called

1 4 8



for peace between whites and Indians, and conducted graveside cere-

monies. In doing so, they asserted their own ceremonial and political

presence, but if there was resistance to the Seattle place-story embed-

ded in Native participation in Chief Seattle Days, no one outside the

indigenous community seemed to notice. Native people surely had their

own Seattle place-stories; as historians of other places have shown, pri-

vate stories shared among communities with limited access to public

discourse can be the basis for a vibrant alternative historical conscious-

ness. Around kitchen tables, at winter dances, and in tribal council meet-

ings, tribal people surely told their own stories about what Seattle—the

man and the city—meant from their own perspectives, keeping alive

their own memories of urban conquest. It would be years, however,

before those place-stories reached white audiences.30

Stories have a past; they come from somewhere. Stories also perform

work; when they are told, they enact power. Seattle’s place-stories both

reflected and reinforced the city’s patterns of power, as illustrated by two

final Potlatch stories. Leon Metcalf, who spent many years recording the

stories of Puget Sound Indian people, saw firsthand the power of Seat-

tle’s urban narrative. Late in his life, he recalled attending the Golden

Potlatch of 1912, where the Big Bug and the Tilikums commanded the

thoroughfares, where totem poles decorated downtown, and where

indigenous people were among the throngs. “My father and I were walk-

ing across a street after the parade had gone past,” he told an interviewer, 

but there was still lot of racket, it was very loud. There were two Indian women,

probably Duwamish Indians, that were there selling clams and baskets, prob-

ably. One turned to the other and I listened to hear what she was going to say.

What she said was [we are making noise] . . . it was kind of a pun, a play on

words, on her part.

From our perspective almost a century later, it is hard not to see the

Duwamish woman’s Whulshootseed wordplay as a sardonic reference

to the extravagant chaos that the Tilikums had orchestrated, or perhaps

even as a protest against the public silence of local indigenous people

in civic discourse. In a city that used Indian images and stories to make

T H E  C H A N G E R S ,  C H A N G E D  /  1 4 9



sense of itself, real Native people, and especially those not affiliated with

totem poles, were pushed to the margins of urban society. They now

had little impact on the shape of Seattle’s urban narrative—except maybe

as metaphors.31

More than two decades later, in 1939, Snohomish elder Harriet

Williams fondly recalled the Potlatches and expressed hope that more

would be held in the future:

I have a jumbled, but happy memory of Seattle’s Potlatch—walking along

avenues full of many shops—many people and the hum of many voices—the

thrill of watching various drill teams and bands march with perfect precision—

so many beautiful floats, the result of thought and work . . . yes, I had a most

enjoyable time.

Like Skagit shamans visiting the optometrist, Plains warriors on the

AYPE Ferris wheel, or Haida assembly-line workers, Williams’s mem-

ories of Potlatch reminded readers that Native people, so often relegated

to Seattle’s urban past, were also part of Seattle’s urban present. But as

she continued, Williams also drew attention to all that had been lost:

But I somehow still long for those past days—I can see the approach of count-

less canoes, the sounds of drums and the rhythms of different chants—my

own language, which I hear so seldom now. But such is progress—and so the

Indian of today brings his dollars and cents to Potlatch and receives various

pleasures in return—and hopes Seattle will keep on having Potlatch.

By the 1930s, this kind of image—the sweeping away of the city’s

complicated past (and most of its Indians) before a crushing wave of

metaphors, marketing, and metropolis—had become received wisdom

and common knowledge. But just as tides come in, they rush out again,

and Williams’s words were spoken on the eve of a new era in Seattle’s

complicated Native histories in which the place-stories told in Seattle,

and the people doing the telling, would change yet again.32

1 5 0


























8 / On the Cusp of Past and Future

M
arian wesley smith, an anthropologist at Columbia

University, spent much of the 1930s conducting research

among the Native peoples of Puget Sound. Her travels

brought her into contact with the descendants of the indi-

genous people of Seattle, and the urbanized landscape of the pre–Second

World War maritime Northwest shaped much of what she had to say

about the state of Indians in the region. Native people on Puget Sound,

Smith argued, had “come through remarkably well” considering the “rig-

orous mushroom development” of places like Seattle. “No other Indi-

ans of the whole continent have been similarly engulfed by the sudden

growth of city populations [or] have been exposed to the full impact of

twentieth-century urban society,” she wrote in the 1940s. To Smith, the

successful adaptation of Puget Sound’s Native peoples was “certainly

better than that of many Indians classified as less primitive.” In fact,

she wrote, “it is this sort of dilemma that throws doubt upon classification

schemes.” Despite the near-total dispossession of indigenous people

from Seattle’s urban landscape, surviving Native peoples’ accommo-

dation to urban change in Puget Sound seemed to challenge her dis-

cipline’s very foundations.1

The conditions of Indian people in urban Puget Sound also threw

doubt upon another kind of classification scheme: the boundaries

between past, present, and future. Smith saw this just as clearly. “If today

Salish life is mingled with, and sometimes indistinguishable from,

modern American and Canadian life,” she wrote, “so much the better.

If the past and the present converge, and the future may be expected

to partake of both, so much closer to reality is our picture of the North-

west.” And for Indians in Seattle in the 1930s, the past, present, and

1 5 1



future did seem to converge. Like the years surrounding 1880, the 1930s

were a transition between two periods in the city’s urban and Indian

histories, a hinge between one era and another. The years around 1880

had represented a transition between a strong indigenous presence in

Seattle and indigenous dispossession, as well as the beginnings of a

regional Indian hinterland. By the 1930s, Seattle had developed a com-

plex interweaving of multiple Native histories: Duwamish descen-

dants of the area’s indigenous communities and Native people from

far away shared a city studded with totem poles and explained by sto-

ries about Indians. Mr. Glover’s bird’s-eye panorama, the 1880 census,

and other sources had offered glimpses of Native Seattle on the eve of

a massive urban transformation. Sources from the 1930s show the

results of that transformation and offer their own glimpses into a city

that, unbeknownst to its residents (Indian or otherwise), was on the

eve of yet another great change.2

In 1930, Seattle was a bona fide metropolis, a city of 350,000

people. Few vestiges of the indigenous landscape remained—the

Duwamish River had been straightened, the waters of Lake Washing-

ton now flowed through the Hiram M. Chittenden Locks rather than

the extinct Black River, and new neighborhoods of bungalows and apart-

ments blanketed hills that had once been barriers to urban growth. It

seemed that Seattle had made good on its urban promises. But instead

of optimism, there was anxiety. Seattle was experiencing the first throes

of the Great Depression and, as it had during the Panic of 1893, Seat-

tle’s boom-and-bust economy was suffering greatly. The crash of 1929

also changed the lives of Indian people in Seattle. Many of the small

firms that had fueled annual migrations of Native men and women to

Seattle—farms, sawmills, canneries—laid off their Indian workers first,

then closed as banks failed. Layoffs and business failures slowed the

widespread movements of Native people up and down the coast and

from reservations in Puget Sound, where many of the descendants of

Seattle’s indigenous people now lived. The Depression also wreaked

havoc on Indian attempts to establish a permanent presence in Seat-

tle. For example, Ralph Young (or Looshkát), a Hoonah Raven Tlingit

and founding member of the Alaska Native Brotherhood, found his for-

1 5 2



tunes changing in the 1930s. After helping discover the wildly successful

Chichagof Mine in Alaska, Young and his uncle had traded their

shares in the mine for property along the industrializing Duwamish.

Soon after the market collapse, however, the men were forced to for-

feit the profitable land (which would eventually be occupied by the Boe-

ing Company) because of unpaid taxes and return to Alaska.3

Despite the dislocations of the Depression, however, Indian people

had found ways to call Seattle home. The manuscript of the 1930 cen-

sus offers insight into the lives of the city’s Native men, women, and

children. Their numbers were not great—less than 1 percent of the urban

population—but their circumstances speak to the roots that Indian

people from other places were putting down in Seattle’s urban soil. Those

roots, like the city itself, were often thoroughly working class. Across

the city, Indian men and women could be found in Seattle’s bungalow

neighborhoods of modest income. On Beacon Hill, Choctaw pipe fitter

Franklin Turner came home from long days at the oil plant to a neigh-

borhood of mechanics and construction workers where his white wife,

Ellen, kept house. On Capitol Hill, mixed-blood, Canadian-born Lily Lee

lived with her white husband, Lorn, who helped build and maintain

the city’s bridges. Like that of the Turners, the Lees’ neighborhood was

mostly white and thoroughly working class, with neighbors working

as bakers and seamstresses, cashiers and electricians. So was the Admi-

ral neighborhood on Duwamish Head, where truck driver Robert Lee

(no relation to Lorn) and his full-blood “Washington Indian” wife, Min-

nie, provided for their eight-year-old son, Eugene. And Admiral was

much like South Park along the Duwamish, where the white-Inuit Ryner

family lived off the money husband Homer earned as a stone polisher

in a local factory. There was also a cluster of mixed-race families around

Salmon Bay. Swedish immigrant Paul Peterson, a deckhand on a tug,

lived with his Skagit wife, Clara, and their teenage sons, Bernard and

Chester, on the flats near the western stretch of the Ship Canal. Nellie

Wooley, an Alaskan Haida, kept house for her boatbuilder husband, John,

in the industrial area that had sprung up on the now-filled estuary

between Salmon Bay and Smith’s Cove. On the south side of Salmon

Bay, not far from the site of Hwelchteed’s old place, the Scottish and

O N  T H E  C U S P  O F  P A S T  A N D  F U T U R E  /  1 5 3



Stoney Indian Darling family got by on John Darling’s earnings as a

construction worker.4

Although the experiences of most of these families are lost to his-

tory, two mixed-race families living near Salmon Bay left some records

behind, giving us a sense of their lives beyond the census enumera-

tor’s rows and columns and offering insights into what it meant to be

Indian in Seattle. One family, the Youngbloods, lived in the Crown Hill

area north of Salmon Bay. Bowhertta Ladder, the matriarch of the fam-

ily, had been born among the Nuu-chah-nulth but raised by the Makah,

and now made baskets and sold them downtown for up to ten dollars

each. Her daughter Minnie worked as a domestic servant, and son-in-

law John Youngblood ran a gas station. For all their seeming success,

the family faced challenges. Barry Hawley, whose father married into

the family, recalled that “Indians . . . were discriminated against in many

bad ways. It was very hard for those young people.” Meanwhile, Karl

Peterson, a Swedish-born longshoreman, mourned the recent death of

his Makah wife, Ann, and struggled to raise their daughter, Helen. Helen

Peterson Schmitt described a city where “No Indians Allowed” signs

hung in shop windows, leading her to hide her Makah ancestry. For

Schmitt, the lutefisk, glögg, and hambos of her father’s people were

the ethnic traditions with which she identified, and only decades later

would she reconnect with her Makah relatives. On the other hand, one

of the few things Schmitt knew for sure about her mother was her

visibility as an Indian. “When the police had a little lost Indian per-

son who didn’t speak English,” she told an interviewer decades later,

“they brought her to my mother, so she’d help with them.” Despite

the pressures to hide one’s Native ancestry, then, the story of Ann Peter-

son suggests that Indians were recognized, and recognized each other,

in the city.5

In the 1930s, Indianness could also shape white identities in Seat-

tle. Poet and novelist Richard Hugo, for example, once described the

death of an Indian first-grade classmate, who drowned after becoming

trapped under a log boom on the Duwamish. (“His mother flipped and

for years called him to dinner every evening in prolonged fits of

scream,” Hugo recalled.) But despite their role as friends and neigh-

1 5 4



bors, Native people in Hugo’s neighborhood were also markers of the

lower class. To kids like Hugo who grew up in poor Duwamish River neigh-

borhoods like Youngstown and Riverside, middle-class West Seattle

“towered over the sources of felt debasement, the filthy, loud belching

steel mill, the oily slow river, the immigrants hanging on to their odd ways,

Indians getting drunk in the unswept taverns, the commercial fisher-

men, tugboat workers, and mill workers with their coarse manners.”

For Hugo, Indian people were simultaneously neighbors and metaphors,

members of the urban lower classes as well as symbols of urban poverty.

He was not alone. In a 1935 master’s thesis examining the social dynam-

ics of Hooverville, the homeless encampment on the old Duwamish

tideflats, sociologist Donald Roy described the residents as “natives,”

noted that their homes resembled those of “the Siberian Chuckchee,”

and described prostitutes who sometimes visited Hooverille as “squaws.”

Although only 4 out of Hooverville’s 639 residents were Native accord-

ing to Roy’s count, he nonetheless used Native imagery to highlight

the poverty of Seattle’s homeless. We might wonder whether the

“natives” on the tideflats were called that thanks to memories of Native

migrants camped in those same places only a few years earlier.6

There was some truth to the connections made by Hugo and Roy

between poverty and Indian identity. Beyond the working-class neigh-

borhoods where some mixed-race families lived, Native people in

1930s Seattle were most likely to be found in places inhabited by the

city’s poorest people. One such place was the district of single-resident

occupancy (SRO) hotels that made up much of downtown’s landscape,

including Pioneer Square and Chinatown, two dense neighborhoods

that had grown up on the site of the old Lava Beds. There, Indian men

and women found shelter among the flophouses and apartment build-

ings. Frank Griffey, an Indian railroad worker from Indiana, lived at

the Interurban Hotel on Occidental Avenue, while Tlingit radio musi-

cian Jimmie Thomas rented a room in the Grant Hotel on Seventh

Avenue South. Other Native people found slightly more reputable accom-

modations in apartment hotels further uptown: Estelle Hovland, a Métis

waitress from North Dakota, lived in the “Newly Decorated and Refur-

bished” Hotel Rehan on Seventh and Union, while Greek immigrant

O N  T H E  C U S P  O F  P A S T  A N D  F U T U R E  /  1 5 5



track layer George Ramos and his Blackfoot wife, Hazel, lived with their

newborn son in the Yale Apartments at Sixth and Columbia. Hotels and

apartments like the Yale and the Interurban often had their own repu-

tations among Native people. Makah people told one anthropologist,

for example, that some SRO hotels were quite notorious among their

people: 

Those who make short trips to the cities stay in hotels patronized by whites,

though the hotels most generally frequented would be regarded as third or

fourth rate. One hotel popular with the Makah is over a noisy dance hall

where incoming sailors gather. One of the hotel chambermaids swore that

she would not stay in the place overnight, that it was bad enough to have to

work there during the day. However, both white men and white women stay

in the hotel which was once one of the good hotels in the city. Others from

Neah Bay patronize hotels in quieter locations, which are said to have better

reputations.

Just as the presence of Indians could be a marker of poor neighbor-

hoods in the eyes of white observers, whiteness, as well as class dis-

tinctions, played a factor in Makah people’s understandings of the city.7

Life in Seattle in the 1930s brought Native people into contact with

more than just the city’s white residents. Both the Interurban and Grant

hotels—as well as the Hotel Marion, where Joseph Carrasco, a Chilean–

Alaskan Indian steelworker, lived, and the Kenney Apartments on James

Street, where widowed Tlingit domestic worker Mary Bezonoff roomed—

were run by Japanese immigrants and their American-born children.

Meanwhile, life in the SRO districts also meant that many Indian people

had everyday encounters with Filipino sailors, agricultural workers, and

laborers, who made up a significant—if often transient—part of Seat-

tle’s downtown population. Some of these men would also become the

fathers of a generation of mixed-ancestry people. Diane Vendiola was

one of these; her Swinomish mother met her Filipino father, a laborer

and boxer, in Seattle in the 1930s. According to Vendiola, “it was nat-

ural for them to come together.” Similar Indian-Filipino relationships

resulted in the birth of a generation that would go on to shape Seattle’s

1 5 6



politics in the decades to come: both Bernie Reyes Whitebear, founder

of the United Indians of All Tribes, and Bob Santos, a leader in the

city’s Asian–Pacific Islander community, were what Santos called

“Indipinos.” In the working world of Depression-era Seattle, new

kinds of Indian identities were being formed and the stage was being

set for a new political landscape in the city.8

Finally, the 1930 census includes the institutionalized Indians of Seat-

tle: the men, women, and children of the city’s asylums. At the Sacred

Heart Orphanage, four young children from Washington tribes, includ-

ing the Makah and S’Klallam—James Henry, Angeline La Belle, and

the siblings Bernice and Carl Kavanaugh—appear in the rosters among

their majority white compatriots. At the King County Hospital, where

full-blood Yakama Ernest Spencer worked as a truck driver, the list of

Native patients and their tribes is like a directory to Seattle’s Indian hinter-

land: Tlingit, Haida, Snohomish, Tsimshian, Canadian Métis. These were

also perhaps some of Seattle’s poorest Native people; ranging in age

from twenty to nearly sixty, all but one of the hospital’s Indian patients

were listed as unemployed. This was also the case for Cherokee Harry

Marshall and “Siwash” Dorothy Martin, the two Indian residents of the

city jail. These were men and women for whom life in the city had not

been easy, particularly in the lean years of the 1930s.

Census tables for the hospital and jail suggest that there were other

Native people in Seattle in 1930, people the enumerators would have

missed: the homeless, the transient, and the seasonally migrant. Surely,

many of these harder-to-find (or easier-to-ignore) Indians existed, invis-

ible to the census takers. And except for people like Ann Peterson, the

Makah woman who opened her Ballard home to needy Indians, and

the Native neighbors whose presence shaped Richard Hugo’s class

consciousness, Indian people were largely invisible in Seattle’s urban

landscape. Unlike the Seattle of the 1880s, where well-known Indian

enclaves existed on the Lava Beds and the waterfront, in 1930 Native

people were integrated into the city’s poor and working-class districts

but had little public presence. And unlike in 1878, when real Indians

and their canoes appeared matter-of-factly in Mr. Glover’s drawing of

the city, living Indian people were largely absent from the city’s self-

O N  T H E  C U S P  O F  P A S T  A N D  F U T U R E  /  1 5 7



image. Indian images, however, were not. The urban landscape in which

these Indian people lived had changed dramatically in only a few short

decades. Through stories of Chief Seattle and doomed “last” Indians,

and through the city’s encounter with its Indian hinterland, Seattle

had developed not only a new set of place-stories but also a new land-

scape that was marked by Indian symbols. By the late 1930s, Seattle had

become a city of totems.

Indian images guarded most approaches to the city. On the west, a

totem pole stood on an overlook offering views of the city from Duwam-

ish Head, while others graced the ship canal locks and the downtown

waterfront. On the north, tourist establishments—the Thunderbird

Hotel, the Totem Pole Motel, and the Twin Teepees Lounge—used

Indian images to attract travelers motoring on the new Pacific High-

way. On the east, visitors plying the state-of-the-art floating bridge across

Lake Washington entered a tunnel under the city’s hills by passing

through a portal surrounded by Northwest Coast–style designs and

text that read “Seattle: Portal to the Pacific.” Along with the Potlatches,

Founders Day events, busts and seals and statues of Chief Seattle, and

other urban place-stories, the urban landscape itself spoke to the impor-

tance of Indians as defining elements of Seattle’s civic self-image.9

In Pioneer Place Park, at the heart of the city’s oldest neighborhood,

the Chief-of-All-Women pole that had been stolen from On the Cot-

tonwood in 1899 remained the grandest and eldest of Seattle’s Indian

icons. But then, just after 10 p.m. on 22 October 1938, an unidentified

man placed gasoline-soaked rags against the base of the pole, set the

rags on fire, and disappeared into the darkness. To this day, no one knows

why. But as Seattleites decided how best to replace the irreparably dam-

aged artifact, a clear distinction was made between Indian imagery in

the city and urban Indians themselves. At first, two local Suquamish

men, accomplished lumbermen employed by the Works Progress

Administration (WPA), were asked to carve the new pole. However, many

observers feared that Richard Temple and Lawrence Webster (the

grandson of Wahalchoo, who had once dived for power off Alki Point)

might introduce “some goofy innovations,” and one reporter who vis-

ited their homes across Puget Sound was disturbed to find that they

1 5 8



spoke English fluently and even drove trucks. Ethnographer Melville

Jacobs, for his part, argued that only his white colleague Viola Garfield

could do the job right. Meanwhile, the Times solicited opinions from

Native people at a baseball game in North Seattle, only to find that these

Indians hardly seemed Indian at all: they were playing an “American”

sport, one of the men was carving a pole with Teddy Roosevelt on it,

and another suggested painting the pole with store-bought paint instead

of traditional pigments. This was the standard kind of urban-versus-

Indian history at work: Indians in the city were in fact no longer Indi-

ans, and Native truck-drivers and ballplayers were ignorant and

undeserving of the Indianness the Chief-of-All-Women pole represented.

In the end the job was given to carvers at Saxman in Alaska, some of

whose ancestors had once lived in On the Cottonwood, in exchange for

the remains of the original pole. Never mind that the carving of the

replacement pole was sponsored by a federal agency, the Civilian Con-

servation Corps; these were real Indians, not only because they came

from a “totem pole culture” but because of their perceived distance from

urban life. Far-off Indians, exotic and abstract, were preferable to

familiar ones who called Seattle home, and were the only ones deemed

fit to hew “sixty feet of freshly-carved monsters ferocious enough to set

a lady tourist tittupy with horror.”10

Despite this tension between Seattle’s Native imagery and its Indian

residents, Native people were sometimes active participants in the cre-

ation of the city’s Indian iconography. Enumerators of the 1930 cen-

sus, for example, found a family from Ucluelet on Vancouver Island

living along the Duwamish River, not far from where Seetoowathl and

his wife had starved to death in 1920. Like many other Nuu-chah-nulth

people, Simon Peter, his wife, Annie, their grown son, Solomon, and

their younger children, Evelyn, Arthur, and Elsie, had come to Seattle

in search of opportunity. For Solomon, that meant hard work as a gen-

eral laborer on the docks and in the industrial areas of town. But for

Simon, work in the city meant carving totem poles, which were then

sold to places like Ye Olde Curiosity Shop. For Simon Peter, being urban

and being Indian were not necessarily in conflict—in fact, one facili-

tated the other. This was also the case for Jimmy John, another Nuu-

O N  T H E  C U S P  O F  P A S T  A N D  F U T U R E  /  1 5 9



chah-nulth. From the community of Mowachat on the west coast of Van-

couver Island, John had traveled regularly to Seattle with his family and

often sold items he carved from wood and silver to Ye Olde Curiosity

Shop and other tourist outlets. One of his most lucrative opportuni-

ties, however, came in 1936, when he was hired by a curio-shop owner

to carve a series of totem poles that would be incorporated into the design

of a new building. By 1937, the misnamed Haida House was doing a

brisk business in baskets, masks, model canoes, and miniature totem

poles out of a building adorned with Thunderbirds, bears, and eagles

carved by John in return for room and board. The Haida House—now

the Totem House Fish and Chips shop—was part of a new 1930s ver-

nacular that used totem poles, tipis, and other Indian images to capture

the attention of tourists, but behind the seeming kitsch lay the labor and

expertise of a Native artisan. For John, who lived in Seattle for ten years

before returning to British Columbia to become a leader in the renais-

sance of Northwest Coast art, urban life provided not just economic oppor-

tunity but a chance to establish himself as a Native artist. And in doing

so, he helped craft Seattle’s Indian iconography.11

In the late 1930s, though, the shape of the city, and of urban history

itself, was about to change. The lean years in the city of totems were

about to end, as mobilization for global conflict dramatically transformed

the city, its population, and its economy. In later decades, many of Seat-

tle’s older residents, as well as some of its historians, would come to

see the 1930s as the last years of “old Seattle.” In a series of interviews

conducted at the beginning of the twenty-first century, for example,

Seattle residents who remembered Depression-era Seattle—wealthy

and poor, black and white, radical and conservative—described the

traits that made Seattle of the 1930s so different from the city of later

decades. For WPA artist Bill Cumming, broadcasting heiress Patsy Col-

lins, unrepentant Wobbly Jesse Petrich, African American dietician Mar-

ian Valley-Lightner, and Puget Power technician Tom Sandry, seemingly

intractable racial and social divisions, radical politics, and an economy

still driven by extractive industries distinguished the 1930s. Their

descriptions of “Old Seattle” are exercises in nostalgia, but they also

reflect the very real transformations that took place during and after

1 6 0



the Second World War. As the lean years came to an end for many of

Seattle’s residents, so too did one era of the city’s history.12

This was true for Seattle’s Indian history as well. In the years sur-

rounding 1880, Seattle had been on the cusp of an urban and Indian

revolution. Back then, “Seattle Illahee”—a mixed-race town on the urban

indigenous frontier—was about to give way to a modern city of the

Changers that used Native imagery to explain itself to the world, that

dispossessed local indigenous people, and that spawned an Indian

hinterland. In the 1930s, that imagery, dispossession, and hinterland

remained largely in place, but the beginnings of a new kind of urban

Indian history were visible as well. Stoney and Choctaw women and

men arriving from beyond the city’s regional hinterland, a Makah woman

helping lost Indian children, and a Hesquiaht carver using a job in the

city to launch a Native renaissance each helped lay the foundations for

a new chapter in Seattle’s Indian and urban histories. But in the 1930s,

on the cusp between past and present, Indian people were often over-

shadowed by Indian imagery. When Mac and Ike, the heroes of John

Dos Passos’s working-class epic The 42nd Parallel, arrived in Seattle, for

example, their experiences there reflected not only the fears and aspi-

rations of the Great Depression but the landscape of urban conquest:

The next day was sunny; the Seattle waterfront was sparkling, smelt of lum-

beryards, was noisy with the rattle of carts and yells of drivers when they 

got off the boat. They went to the Y.M.C.A. for a room. They were through

with being laborers and hobos. They were going to get clean jobs, live

decently and go to school nights. They walked round the city all day, and in

the evening met Olive and Gladys in front of the totempole [sic] on Pioneer

Square.13

Of course they did.

O N  T H E  C U S P  O F  P A S T  A N D  F U T U R E  /  1 6 1


























9 / Urban Renewal in Indian Territory

I
n the city of totem poles and Native ghosts, real live Indi-

ans seemed to reappear suddenly in 1970. On the morning of 8

March, more than a hundred Native men, women, and children gath-

ered at Fort Lawton, a decommissioned army base on high bluffs in

northwest Seattle. Spreading out, they quickly entered the fort from all

sides, scaling the fences while a diversionary force raised a ruckus at

the main gate. As military police descended, Puyallup activist Bob Sati-

acum read a statement addressed to the “Great White Father and All

His People” claiming Fort Lawton “in the name of all American Indi-

ans by the right of discovery.” Invoking treaties supposedly promising

surplus government land to tribes, the activists demanded the fort. Most

of the proclamation went unheard in the ensuing chaos of scuffles and

handcuffs, but news of the invasion quickly spread around the world.

According to the Seattle Times, an Italian News Agency correspondent

had asked, “You can’t imagine how fascinating this story is in Europe.

Indians attacking a fort in the West of the United States. Tell me, do

you have an Indian problem out there?” Meanwhile, front-page photos

of uniformed white men carting Native women and children off to jail

ensured that Seattle’s “Indian problem” joined student protests and car-

pet bombings as early-1970s hot political topics.1

This was political theater at its best. The Native invaders of Fort Law-

ton had no legal authority on which to claim land in Seattle. Even if

their proclamation did riff on the legal frameworks established by

treaties, these were urban Indians, most with no connections to the

Duwamish, Lake, and Shilshole peoples whose territories had become

the city of Seattle. But by 1970, what it meant to be Indian in America—

and what it meant to be American on Indian land—was changing, and

1 6 2



as a result, the place-story Native activists were telling in Seattle was a

new one. This city and this land are ours, they shouted—and for the

first time, Seattle, and the world, seemed to be listening.

But this was only one of several place-stories being told by urban

Indians in postwar Seattle. As Native people from many tribes and

nations worked to make the city home, they told stories as diverse as

their communities of origin. Some actively participated in the city’s

romantic narrative of the Denny Party, while others wove Seattle’s urban

history into a broader story of genocide and dispossession. Still other

urban Indians, including the city’s most destitute, struggled simply to

assert their basic humanity in a civic story that cast them as little more

than symbols of racial decay. In each case, the stories Native people told

about their place in Seattle had everything to do with the changes in

the city and in what it meant to be Indian and American. As cultural,

political, and even environmental landscapes shifted in the decades after

the Second World War, so would Seattle’s Indian place-stories, and those

stories would be as complicated and diverse as urban Indians them-

selves. Urban renewal would have many conflicting meanings as Native

people worked to make Seattle home.

T
o say that seattle’s urban Indian activism began

with the invasion of Fort Lawton in 1970 is a bit like saying

that Seattle’s urban history origins lie only at Alki Point. If the

“Indian attack” of the Vietnam era took most of Seattle by sur-

prise, it was only the latest and most visible of a series of efforts by urban

Native people to claim space in Seattle. To understand the origins of

Indian struggles to find home in Seattle, we must go back to an earlier

war. Epidemics and railroads had been the great forces that shaped Seat-

tle’s urban history in the nineteenth century, but the pivot on which the

city’s twentieth-century history turned was war. The Great War had

helped complete Seattle’s arrival on the world stage, but it was the Sec-

ond World War that would truly transform Seattle into a city of global

significance. More than perhaps any other American city, Seattle would

be changed by the necessities of prosecuting war in Europe, Africa, and

the Pacific. The changes were most obvious in the kinds of work people

U R B A N  R E N E W A L  I N  I N D I A N  T E R R I T O R Y  /  1 6 3



did in the city. Where in the 1930s lumber mills and canneries were

the main industry in the region, by the 1950s the shipyards and

hangars and foundries that supplied the Allies with machines of war

had changed the city’s economy in profound ways. Between 1939 and

1941, for example, Seattle’s manufacturing base doubled; the number

of people employed in manufacturing went from 35,000 in 1940 to

115,000 in 1943. Across the American West, cities were being trans-

formed by wartime industry. The battleships and warplanes from

Seattle—including one called Chief Seattle—helped turn the course of

global conflict, just as they cemented Seattle’s new role in the global

economy. Seattle was now Boeing’s town.2

The Second World War had begun a new chapter in Seattle’s urban

story, and it also marked a turning point in Indian history, as Indians

moved to the city to work on behalf of the war effort. Adeline Skultka,

a young Kaigani Haida from Craig, Alaska, was one of these. After grad-

uating from high school, she came to Seattle with her sister and a cousin

and immediately found work on a Boeing assembly line and as a welder

in a local shipyard; soon after, she met her Filipino husband, Genaro

“Gerry” Garcia. Despite the long history of Indian migration to Seat-

tle, for people like Skultka, moving to the wartime city involved a steep

learning curve—but as before, the city beckoned with opportunity, espe-

cially compared to the grim prospects back home. “A lot of them had

never been off the reservation before,” remembered Lillian Chapelle

(Cowlitz-Yakama), “and yet there were jobs here in Seattle.” Like ser-

vice on the battlefield, work on the home front proved that Native people

could be both Indian and American.3

The enthusiasm and opportunity of the war would soon fade,

though. When, at war’s end, cancellation of government contracts at the

shipyards and factories led to layoffs and as returning soldiers clam-

ored for jobs, women and people of color were the first to go. Mean-

while, Native veterans struggled to reintegrate into civilian society, and

Indians who depended on the waning extractive industries of Old Seat-

tle found themselves increasingly adrift. Although the economy regained

its footing in the 1950s, the benefits of the boom rarely trickled down

to urban Indians, who experienced discrimination in virtually every aspect

1 6 4



of life: Chinese restaurants that refused to hire nonwhite waitresses,

vacant apartments mysteriously rented, hospitals that refused to serve

Native people, murders of homeless Indians that went uninvestigated.

During a period when federal Indian policy enthusiastically encouraged

assimilation into mainstream society and few, if any, resources existed

for the Native community, the economic and social realities of 1950s

Seattle afforded urban Indians little security and even less hope.4

The result was that many Indian men and women who came to Seattle

ended up on Skid Road, the area that included Pioneer Square and much

of First Avenue, stretching all the way north to Belltown. In his much-

beloved 1951 history Skid Road, Murray Morgan described “men sit-

ting on curbs and sleeping in doorways . . . , condemned buildings . . . ,

missions and taverns and wine shops and stores where you can buy a

suit for $3.75.” For Morgan and many other Seattleites, downtown—

particularly Belltown, First Avenue, and Pioneer Square—had become

“the place of dead dreams,” populated by the aging workforce of Old

Seattle, which one 1950 memoir called “the discards from the mael-

strom of industrial activity.” The streets and run-down hotels of Skid

Road were also home to hundreds of Indians. Colville architect Lawney

Reyes, for example, recalled that during those years “if you wanted to

see an Indian in Seattle you’d jump in the car and go down to Skid Row.”

In the 1960 census, 30 percent of Pioneer Square’s inhabitants were

either “Indian or Oriental,” and the district included the largest, most

concentrated population of Native people in the city. Out in the hin-

terland, many Indian reservation residents described skid roads as places

where people disappeared, almost as if they had died—and, sometimes,

the deaths were real: cirrhosis, a fall under a passing train, tuberculo-

sis, a knife in the ribs. After the brief window of wartime opportunity,

life in Seattle was almost as bleak as ever for its Indian population—

if not worse.5

The seven women who came together in the 1950s to address this

problem were unlikely activists. Most had come to Seattle during the Sec-

ond World War to work in the defense industries and, unlike most Native

people, now enjoyed the relative security of working- and middle-class

life, focusing their energies on volunteering at churches and their

U R B A N  R E N E W A L  I N  I N D I A N  T E R R I T O R Y  /  1 6 5



children’s schools. On the surface, they were paragons of assimilation—

Christian, married with mixed-race children, and productive members

of postwar society. At the same time, it was these seven women who

would lay the foundations for the radical action at Fort Lawton more

than twenty years later. They first met in 1958 under the leadership of

Pearl Warren, a Makah who had come to the city after the war. Pearl’s

daughter Mary Jo Butterfield had recently brought home a desperate

Indian couple, left on the streets after the wife was discharged from the

hospital. Like Ann Peterson’s home in 1930s Ballard, this postwar Makah

household was a refuge for urban Indians. Inspired in part by that expe-

rience, Warren, Butterfield, Adeline Skultka Garcia, and their friends

decided that if resources for Native people in Seattle were going to exist,

Native people needed to create them. They began visiting apartment

buildings, downtown hotels, and the Greyhound station—anywhere they

might find other Indian women. By the fall of 1958, they had more than

fifty members, whose tribal communities ranged from Washington and

Alaska to Canada and the Plains. With the help of Erna Gunther, a Uni-

versity of Washington anthropologist, the group incorporated that year

as the American Indian Women’s Service League.6

For almost two decades, the Service League would be Seattle’s lead-

ing urban Indian organization. Pearl Warren, Adeline Garcia, and the

other founders described the role they hoped to play in the inaugural

issue of the Service League’s newsletter:

The newcomer to the city will find [the Service League] a good place to meet

other Indian women and make new friends; and those who want to learn

more about conditions and developments that may eventually affect their

own lives—Indian legislation, medical care, employment, etc.—will hear new

and vital information at each meeting. And to those who can see a way of

picking up and straightening out the threads from the tangle of Indian affairs,

there is the opportunity of doing a real service to the Indian community—

locally, statewide, or even nationally.

And always, the leaders of the Service League connected everyday life

both to tribal traditions and to Indian politics, on scales ranging from

1 6 6



the local to the national. “Where else but in an Indian paper,” asked

one writer in the newsletter, “would you find such unique receipts [sic]

such as ‘Sturgeon Spinal Cord’ and ‘Buckskin Bread,’ legends written

as told by the old people, the ‘Lord’s Prayer’ in Chinook?” She then con-

tinued by pointing out that the newsletter would also cover “land and

claim decisions, inter-tribal meetings, fishing and hunting, House and

Senate Bills pending on local and national levels” and other key issues

in Indian political life.7

But creating community in the city also meant finding a place. With

that in mind, the Service League opened Seattle’s first Indian Center in

1960 in a rented storefront at First and Vine at the northern end of Skid

Road. Two years later, they moved into a larger space across from the

Greyhound Bus depot. Where totem poles and statues of Chief Seattle

greeted non-Indian visitors to Seattle, here real Indians greeted real Indi-

ans as Service League members kept an eye on the bus station, look-

ing for new arrivals.8 Fond memories of the Indian Center highlight

the sense of community created by the women who ran it. In 1970, for

example, Choctaw Seattleite Harvey Davis and his wife, Nellie, recalled

the many things the center had provided over the years:

Food if he was hungry. A friend if he was friendless. Shoes if he was bare-

foot. Sympathy and advice if he was troubled. Thrown out if he was drunk.

Returned to his people if he was lost. A quiet place to sit and read or con-

template. Free clothing on Thursdays. An opportunity to help our less 

fortunate tribesmen.

Most important for the Davises, the center provided “a feeling of

warmth and friendship which can be found in few, if any, other places

in Seattle.” In a city where most Indian people were at worst ostra-

cized or at best neglected, the center was a kind of home, where even

the poorest of Seattle’s Indian community could contribute. Adeline

Garcia recalled how “those bums on [First] Avenue, they’d come in

and clean up the place,” bringing produce and fish from the Public

Market when they could afford it and offering skills such as carpen-

try in return for a hot meal and a place to “stretch out and rest.” Mary

U R B A N  R E N E W A L  I N  I N D I A N  T E R R I T O R Y  /  1 6 7



Jo Butterfield, meanwhile, described the struggles of one Blackfoot

Indian Center volunteer:

Sitting in a house out at High Point [public housing] with five hungry kids

and you’re an alcoholic and you’re trying to dry out and take care of your kids

and you can’t feed them and you don’t have any money—you don’t have bus

fare to get to the Indian Center to get groceries. And you don’t have a phone.

Those kind of people were the ones that worked the hardest and got the most

out of it.

Here was self-help, here were grass roots, here were Indian people of

many nations, creating a place in the city.9

But despite the efforts of the Service League, not everyone felt com-

fortable being Native in Seattle, where those “No Indians Allowed” signs

still hung in windows and, according to Puyallup activist Ramona Ben-

nett, “a lot of Indians were still trying to pass as Italian.” In response,

the Service League saw public relations as a critical element of its mis-

sion, equal to providing services to Native people. The 1961 North Amer-

ican Indian Benefit Ball at the Masonic Temple, for example, showcased

crafts and dances and used television and radio spots to encourage non-

Indians to attend. Similarly, well-attended picnics at Seward Park on

Lake Washington involved Lummi dancers, speeches and stories in the

Makah language, and door prizes of baskets and handmade sweaters.

But the group’s signature event was the salmon bake at Alki Point, which

by 1967 was feeding more than two thousand people and had become

a highlight of the annual Seafair festivities, often as part of reenact-

ments of the Denny Party’s landing at Alki. League members, then, did

not work to overturn the city’s place-story in the 1960s. Instead, they

lobbied to become part of it—as living Indian people.10

Participating in celebrations of urban founding did not preclude out-

spoken advocacy on Native political issues. In particular, Service League

members worked to increase non-Indians’ awareness of the short-

comings of federal Indian policy: most notably the relocation and ter-

mination policies of the postwar years, one of which sent Native people

to cities only to abandon them, and the other of which sought to negate

1 6 8



treaties by dissolving reservations and annulling the federal-tribal rela-

tionship altogether. Pearl Warren, for example, represented the Service

League in particular and urban Indians in general before a U.S. Sen-

ate subcommittee on Indian affairs in 1968, and that same year, the

Service League helped organize an international urban Indian confer-

ence in Seattle that welcomed activists and community organizers from

the United States and Canada to share stories and strategies. But fund-

ing for their efforts was hard to come by, even as the city’s political land-

scape shifted toward a multicultural civic politics and as the federal

government began to fund programs in other minority communities.

“So much money was coming into Seattle,” recalled Lakota Service

League member Letoy Eike, “and Indians were not getting anything.”

For two years, Service League members tried to convince city officials

to earmark money for an Indian Center in a vacant site at the south end

of Lake Union, but as one observer commented, the city “passed the

buck” while “millions of dollars poured into the [predominantly African

American] Central District.” One Model Cities project even paid for Cen-

tral District youth to carve a totem pole portraying the nation’s black

history, which must have underscored the disparities between the city’s

black and Indian communities.11

Urban Indian strategies in Seattle were about to change, however.

For some younger urban Indians, including an Indian Center volun-

teer named Bernie Whitebear, the frustration was building. Whitebear,

born Bernie Reyes and a Colville from eastern Washington, was one of

many who had come to Seattle to work at Boeing. In that sense, he

was like Adeline Garcia, but Whitebear’s activism represented a new

style of Indian leadership in Seattle. Although concerned by the dom-

inance of African American concerns in Seattle racial politics, he was

also inspired by the work of Seattle’s black, Latino, and Asian Amer-

ican communities. Whitebear and his allies began to formulate a more

multicultural—and more radical—approach to claiming space in the

city. And so when the city, the army, and the Bureau of Indian Affairs

dragged their feet on a proposal for a new Indian Center at the recently

decommissioned Fort Lawton and Indian activists took over Alcatraz

Island, the stage was set for a new chapter in Seattle’s urban Indian history.12

U R B A N  R E N E W A L  I N  I N D I A N  T E R R I T O R Y  /  1 6 9



The occupation of Alcatraz by American Indian Movement activists

and others in 1969 had garnered international attention, and by capi-

talizing both on the successes of other movements’ radical strategies

and on a growing popular interest in (and sympathy toward) indige-

nous peoples, the occupation of Alcatraz was a turning point for Native

activism, focusing international attention on the everyday lives of

Indian people in the United States. While the takeover of Alcatraz was

a failure in the sense that Indian people and institutions never achieved

permanent tenure on the Rock, it was a phenomenal success in that it

inspired similar tactics among “Red Power” activists throughout the

nation and brought public attention to Native issues. And so on that

brisk March morning in 1970, more than a hundred Indians “took” Fort

Lawton.13

The invasion was a radical departure from the more diplomatic tra-

ditions of the Service League activists. Nothing made this more obvi-

ous than the allies the takeover attracted: Alcatraz veteran Leonard Peltier,

radical black comedian Dick Gregory, and antiwar feminist Jane Fonda

all came to offer their support. (So did the radical Seattle Liberation Front,

which had recently held a protest naming part of the University of Wash-

ington campus “The People’s Republic of Leschi” after the man who

led the 1856 attack on the city.) The tactics of the takeover were a far

cry from the salmon bakes and mayoral meetings of the Service League:

protestors were more than willing to be arrested, and they even hired

a skywriter to pen “A New Day . . . Fort, Give Up . . . Fort, Surrender” over

the city. There were, however, connections between the Fort Lawton

activists and the Service League. League founder Ella Aquino, for

example, was among those who scaled the fences at Fort Lawton, and

she and other League members, “armed with sandwiches and coffee,”

supported the occupation from behind the scenes and reprinted the Fort

Lawton proclamation in Indian Center News. And in a broader sense,

the Fort Lawton leadership carried the same hopes as the Service League.

In their proclamation, protestors described their vision for Fort Lawton:

We feel that this land of Ft. Lawton is more suitable to pursue an Indian way

of life, as determined by our own standards. By this we mean—this place

1 7 0



does not resemble most Indian reservations. It has potential for modern

facilities, adequate sanitation facilities, health care facilities, fresh running

water, educational facilities, and transportation facilities.

Point for point, this was the same vision that Pearl Warren had pur-

sued for years; she had always wanted to move beyond a crisis-driven

Indian Center and create lasting, proactive Indian institutions in the

city. Despite their more radical and visible tactics, the “invaders” of Fort

Lawton were the political descendants of those first seven women who

had come together back in 1958.14

Many non-Indian Seattleites dismissed the invasion of Fort Lawton

as mere silliness; one Native woman, for example, quit her job after

her boss told her that the takeover “was pretty stupid, and that the Indi-

ans were dumb for doing it and had no reason for doing it.” But despite

negative reactions from some non-Indians (eggs and insults thrown,

death threats made, and neighborhood petitions calling for an end to

the “noise and stupid acts”), by the end of the invasion, more than forty

non-Indian organizations in the city had come to support the occupa-

tion, including the Seattle Human Rights Commission, whose bias

toward African American concerns had frustrated Indian leaders in the

past. And within two years of the invasion, United Indians of All Tribes,

as the activists came to be known, had negotiated an agreement with

the city with the help of Senator Henry “Scoop” Jackson. Sixteen acres

of Fort Lawton, soon to be renamed Discovery Park, would be leased

for an Indian cultural and social-services center. When the Daybreak

Star Cultural Center finally opened in 1976, the Post-Intelligencer called

it a “proud day,” not just for Indians but for the city that had found ways

to compromise with activists. As Service League member Arlene Red

Elk put it, “They got their spot.”15

The spot they had gotten was a distinctively Indian one. Designed

by architect Lawney Reyes, Bernie Whitebear’s brother, the Daybreak

Star Cultural Center was inspired by Lakota spiritual leader Black Elk’s

vision of a star that had come down to earth and taken root to form a

sheltering tree, and the building’s four wings, built of timber donated

by Northwest tribes, represented the four directions. Meanwhile, the

U R B A N  R E N E W A L  I N  I N D I A N  T E R R I T O R Y  /  1 7 1



public spaces of Daybreak Star were filled with art made by Indian people

of many tribes: Creek, Tlingit, Chiricahua Apache, Caddo, Cowlitz, and

Aleut, among others. Just as Seattle’s connections to the world had

widened in the years since the Second World War, so had its Indian hin-

terland. No more was that hinterland just a woven coast; it was now a

woven continent.16

But the outward successes of the urban Indian community, sym-

bolized by the opening of Daybreak Star, masked new rifts that were

starting to open within that community. One rift came from the left-

ist, multiracial mode of organizing that Whitebear and his supporters

had pursued. According to Diane Vendiola, whose Filipino father and

Swinomish mother had met in Seattle back in the 1930s, these activists

had pursued what she called “the city mode.” Its confrontational strate-

gies and connections to other minority communities—especially

African Americans and antiwar radicals—alienated some older activists.

This same tension would also arise on reservations as Indian men and

women, energized by leftist tactics honed primarily in urban places,

brought those visions of revolution back to their home communities.

Other rifts were widened by success itself; as urban Indian programs

began to finally receive public funding, they seemed to become less

Indian to many community members. As Marilyn Bentz explained it,

“once money came into the picture, things changed, and it got a lot more

political . . . that turned off a lot of people.” Harvey and Nellie Davis

felt the same way, recalling the early Indian Center as a place “without

a lot of gobbledy-gook, double talk, social service workers lingo,” unlike

the new post–Fort Lawton institutions. For many members of the urban

Indian community, the institutional success of the Indian Center

made it less of a Native place and more like any other social-service

agency.17

At the same time, the successes of Seattle’s Indian community had

profound impacts far beyond the city, as volunteers, activists, and ser-

vice professionals earned their stripes in the urban milieu and then took

their skills and experience back out into Indian country. Women who

had been involved in the American Indian Women’s Service League

(which carried on with its work even as United Indians of All Tribes

1 7 2



grabbed most of the public attention) were among the best examples

of this new generation of Native leadership that had been forged in Seat-

tle. Adeline Garcia went on to become a board member of the innova-

tive Seattle Indian Heritage High School and served as a liaison among

reservations, the Seattle Public Schools, and colleges. Ramona Bennett

became chair of her Puyallup Tribe, while Joyce Reyes, wife of Lawney

and president of the Service League after Pearl Warren, became a Bureau

of Indian Affairs administrator. These and other women would play

crucial roles in the ascent of self-determination—Indian control over

Indian lives—in the 1970s.18

But back in Seattle, where the Daybreak Star Cultural Center, with

its origins in the work of the Service League, told a new place-story by

claiming that the city could indeed be Indian land, there was another

new urban Indian place-story taking form. This one told a very differ-

ent tale from that of United Indians of All Tribes and the American

Indian Women’s Service League. As it would turn out, the postwar suc-

cesses experienced both by the Indian community and by Seattle itself

were a double-edged sword. As public dollars poured into the city to

support programs like Model Cities, Daybreak Star, and the new Indian

Center, other forces of urban renewal were at work. During the same

years that Indians and other activists claimed spaces in a newly multi-

cultural city and demanded public investment in communities of color,

other civic leaders began to invest in the city’s historical heritage. For

Native Americans on Skid Road, life was about to get more difficult, as

the same forces of urban affluence that helped to create new Indian

spaces in the city forced the city’s poorest Indians, quite literally, onto

the streets.

I
n 1991, the seattle arts commission launched an ambi-

tious program called In Public, a citywide set of installations designed

to inspire dialogue about the role of art in everyday urban life. From

the enormous proletarian Hammering Man in front of the Seattle Art

Museum to huge banners hung from light poles demanding “do you

prefer being on welfare?” In Public was edgy and controversial.

One of the most confrontational pieces, by Cheyenne-Arapaho artist

U R B A N  R E N E W A L  I N  I N D I A N  T E R R I T O R Y  /  1 7 3



Hachivi Edgar Heap of Birds, was installed in Pioneer Place Park along-

side the Chief-of-All-Women pole and the bronze bust of Chief Seat-

tle. Called Day/Night, it consisted of two ceramic panels inscribed with

dollar signs, crosses, and text in Whulshootseed and English that read

“Chief Seattle now the streets are your home. Far away brothers and

sisters we still remember you.” Dedicated to the city’s homeless Indi-

ans, Day/Night challenged Seattle’s other place-stories. “In the city of

Seattle there are countless references to our indigenous people,” wrote

Heap of Birds, “from professional football helmets [of the Seahawks,

Seattle’s NFL team], to towering totem poles . . . to the name of the city

itself [but] we do not find institutionalized evidence of the living indige-

nous people.”19

Day/Night also drew attention to the fact that the city’s new Indian

institutions did not necessarily benefit all Indian people. “Daybreak

Star . . . is beautiful,” Heap of Birds told one reporter, “but Pioneer

Square and Occidental Square are also Indian centers.” In fact, by the

1970s, Skid Road had become “Indian territory,” as one observer called

the area around Pioneer Square. It was an urban neighborhood with

its own traditions, institutions, and ways of operating. But as urban

renewal, historic preservation, and heritage tourism—all supported by

the same kinds of public reinvestment that had helped fund the Indian

Center and Daybreak Star—became dominant themes in the 1970s and

beyond, Native Skid Road would disappear, to be replaced by historic

districts catering to tourists. And as downtown was transformed from

historical Skid Road to historic Seattle, it would be filled with art like

Day/Night. Here was the ironic history behind Heap of Birds’ instal-

lation: at the same time that it told a radical new place-story, confronting

the inequalities of postwar urban Native life, it was also made possible

by those inequalities and by the destruction of an Indian neighborhood.20

And a neighborhood it was: for all its dysfunction, for all the poverty

and discrimination and cheap booze, Indian Skid Road was a commu-

nity with its own rules and its own distinctive identity. To begin with,

the Native population on Skid Road tended to be fairly stable. Accord-

ing to one source, they accounted for half the city’s “home guards”—

residents whose home base was in Seattle, as opposed to the rootless

1 7 4



“bindle stiffs,” many of them increasingly elderly white men, who

migrated from place to place. And unlike the general population of Skid

Road, the downtown Indian community included many women, who

often held down jobs as barmaids and cooks. One former Skid Road

resident said it seemed as if every tavern had a Native woman in the

kitchen. Like their Service League counterparts, the women of Skid Road

were problem solvers; they could be depended on, for example, to know

about openings in berry picking, dock work, carpentry, and other jobs.

Among the black jazz clubs, gay cabarets, Chinese restaurants, and Fil-

ipino night cafés that had also sprung up in the area, Native Skid Road

had by the 1960s developed into a functioning, if troubled, commu-

nity with three key institutions: the Indian bar, the single-resident occu-

pancy (SRO) hotel, and the streets themselves.21

At the end of the Second World War, it remained illegal to sell liquor

to Indians in Seattle, and most downtown taverns refused entry to Indian

men and women, relegating them to the streets. But in the late 1950s,

a general relaxing of state liquor laws allowed the formation of what

the local bartender’s union called “bow and arrow joints”—Indian tav-

erns like the Lotus, the Anchor, and El Coco—scattered along First

Avenue from Pioneer Square to Belltown. Each had its own niche: one

attracted Native Alaskans, who left the bar virtually empty during the

summer fishing and logging season; another served a younger crowd,

with more expensive drinks and Indian go-go girls; while a third, fre-

quented by both Indians and Mexicans, had the roughest reputation.

The best documented of the Skid Road Indian bars, the Britannia Tav-

ern, catered to veterans, loggers, railroad men, and migrant laborers, most

with tribal origins in Canada, Washington, Alaska, and the northern-tier

states. At the Britannia, Indians could catch up on gossip from the reser-

vations, drop the guards required by urban life, and simply be Indian.

As at the Service League’s Indian Center, there was a sense of family at

the Brittania; patrons often referred to the bar’s co-owner, a Puget Sound

Indian woman, as “Ma,” “Mom,” and “Little Cousin.” Even Native people

who did not live on Skid Road found the Britannia to be “home terri-

tory”; one veteran who lived in a middle-class neighborhood often came

to the tavern on weekends because “his people” were there.22 

U R B A N  R E N E W A L  I N  I N D I A N  T E R R I T O R Y  /  1 7 5



If the “bow and arrow joints” of Skid Road were homes away from

home, it was another downtown institution, the SRO hotel, which often

provided actual shelter. In more than two dozen hotels, some 1,700

single-occupancy rooms provided cheap accommodations for Native

people and other Skid Road residents. Even the most run-down SRO

hotel could be home. Despite the “long, dingy, and bitter-smelling cor-

ridors” of the Morrison Hotel, for example, one young Indian woman

said, “I loved it here,” and having one’s own hotel room was a sign of

status among the Indian Skid Roaders. For those who were not so for-

tunate, the Romanesque terra-cotta portico of the Pioneer Building, the

benches under the totem pole, and the alleys off the main streets were

often the only option. These public spaces were also Native meeting

grounds, where answers could be found to questions like “What’s hap-

pening?” “Who’s around?” “Is Joe at the Anchor?” “Will he lend me

five dollars?” Skid Road, then, was truly Indian territory.23

But time was not on the side of Skid Road, Indian or otherwise. Since

the 1950s, civic leaders had been entertaining proposals for the revitali-

zation of downtown, and especially of Pioneer Square. Most proposals

included historic preservation (after all, this was the city’s birthplace),

but the plan that became the favorite of business leaders, John Graham

and Company’s 1966 design, proposed razing all but four blocks around

Pioneer Place Park. The Chief-of-All-Women pole and the bronze bust

of Chief Seattle would stay as part of a historic plaza—those place-

stories merited preservation—but skyscrapers, parking lots, and a new

highway would replace the rest of Skid Road. In the late 1960s and early

1970s, however, historic preservation and heritage tourism, like mul-

ticulturalism, had become part of Seattle’s new civic language. Citizen

activists quickly decried the Graham proposal, lobbying instead for the

preservation of the entire neighborhood as a National Historic District.

Not unlike the pioneers several generations before, who had looked to

their Indian past as metropolis was born in their midst, now many of

the city’s residents had begun to look to the city’s historic places as a

balm against rapacious urban development in the postwar era.24

And so the Pioneer Square Historic District, among the first in the

nation, was established in 1970 to much self-congratulation on the part

1 7 6



of historically minded Seattleites. But a nagging question remained:

what to do with the people who actually called the ground of history

home? The answers ranged from the derisively violent to the sympa-

thetically exploitative. One downtown businessman simply called Skid

Road residents “scum of the earth” who should be run out of town, while

one Native Skid Roader remembered a policeman saying to him, “They

didn’t play cowboys and Indians long enough . . . they should have killed

all you bastards off.” As for Graham and Company, the foiled levelers

of Pioneer Square, they argued that the people of Skid Road added “lit-

tle, if anything, to the economy of downtown” and suggested relocat-

ing those who could not be institutionalized in prisons or asylums. Some

supporters of preservation, however, saw the “denizens” of Skid Road

as having value—not as urban citizens but as part of the historic urban

landscape. Mayor Wes Uhlman, for example, delighted in welcoming

visitors to the city with a tour of Skid Road. “I was the only mayor in

America who could do that,” he mused, proud of the combination of

historic buildings and seedy characters that Pioneer Square provided.

Bill Speidel, who led wildly popular historical tours of Pioneer Square’s

underground network of streets and storefronts, agreed, pointing out

that “if we didn’t have the bums around, we’ve have to hire them from

central casting.” For Uhlman and Speidel, the people of Skid Road

had a role to play—literally—in the district’s place-story. This would

be especially true for Indians, who for so long had been used to repre-

sent so much.25

Armed with new preservation and safety ordinances, city officials

shut dozens of SRO hotels, and by the mid-1970s, three quarters of the

city’s downtown housing stock had been lost and nearly 60 percent of

Pioneer Square’s countable population had disappeared. The Morrison

Hotel, for example, closed in 1976. It eventually reopened, but by 1981,

more than 15,000 units of SRO housing had been lost in downtown

Seattle. Meanwhile, the Britannia had shut its doors many years

before—in 1970, the same year that the first historic preservation ordi-

nance was passed—and many of Seattle’s downtown “bow and arrow

joints” followed suit soon after.26

For people who remained on Skid Road, downtown’s “renaissance”

U R B A N  R E N E W A L  I N  I N D I A N  T E R R I T O R Y  /  1 7 7



was a disaster. “A large portion of the city’s heritage and architecture

has been saved, business has been improved, tax revenues are up,” noted

one critic in 1972. “Everything is fine except for the people who used

to live here. Their condition has not been improved, but has been made

worse.” And as the hotels closed, the people who remained downtown

tended to be poorer, sicker, more often homeless and unemployed, and

less likely to be white. Skid Road residents who could move on did so,

while those left behind depended upon the few missions and social ser-

vices that remained downtown. In just a few short years of urban renewal

and historic preservation, the Skid Road Native community and many

of its diverse neighbors had been almost entirely erased by a district of

art galleries, bookshops, restaurants, and taverns catering to tourists

and the young and middle class. Indian people, meanwhile, remained

the most visible minority on what was left of Skid Road, struggling to

survive alongside more new totem poles. One writer noted that “vic-

tims of the white man’s scorn can still be seen in doorways and around

Seattle’s taverns near Pioneer Square, or lolling on the area’s few park

benches,” as though the Britannia, the Morrison, and the other insti-

tutions of Native Skid Road had never existed. Seattle’s third Indian place-

story, of the homeless Native person as an urban allegory, had been

literally built into the landscape.27

Indian people on Skid Road were more than aware of their own vis-

ibility. As early as the 1970s, a handful of voices from Skid Road

expressed defiance toward the role Indians had been told to play in Seat-

tle’s urban narrative. Mexican Indian J. A. Correa, for example, wrote

in 1972 about the visibility of Indian people in the district:

Pawn shops / and / broken people / who drink and sing / and beg for wine /

they provide amusement/ for the tourists / who believe in / historical sites /

and little kids / from school / are taken there by / devoted bored teachers / to

see the heart of their / grandparents’ city.

Correa’s poem is a dramatic alternative to the story of downtown’s

“renaissance,” illustrating the human costs of urban renewal and what

it meant to try to live in what was now the ground of Official Urban

1 7 8



History. Meanwhile, architect Laurie Olin described meeting some of

the remaining Skid Road Indians while sketching Pioneer Square street-

scapes in the 1970s:

One morning under the pergola an Indian sat down next to me and said:

“How are you at drawing scars?” and grinned. . . . These people whose iden-

tity has been so brutally denied wanted to see that they were still there. My

drawings seemed to reaffirm their existence. “Draw me, man, draw me; draw

me next, I’ll hold still right here,” said one.

A quarter century later, Earle Thompson, a Yakama writer who had spent

years on Skid Road, highlighted the ongoing visibility of homeless Indian

people downtown:

In a mission / doorway / a in-num [Indian] / puts / a green bottle / up to his

lips. / He begins / to sing: / “Gimme 5 / minutes / only five minutes more; /

let me stay / ah-yah-aye . . .” / He pounds his fist / on the wall. / A couple

passes / and he smiles / at them.

Like the Service League members holding their public events and the

Fort Lawton activists reading their proclamation, here at last, twelve

decades after the founding of Seattle, were Indian voices telling a new

place-story. Or more to the point, here at last, twelve decades after the

founding, someone was listening and writing it down.28

It was against this backdrop of historic preservation and the erasure

of Skid Road’s Indian history that Edgar Heap of Birds’ Day/Night was

installed to wide acclaim. Columnist and cartoonist David Horsey wrote,

for example, “Amid the human wreckage congregating around the Pio-

neer Square pergola, it seemed that it would be redundant to point out

the tragic circumstances of some of Chief Seattle’s tribal descendants.

But, instead, the panels stand like exclamation points among the liv-

ing proof of their indictment.” The irony of Day/Night, though, is that

it too is part of the gentrification of the neighborhood, created to speak

to those who visit Pioneer Place Park and Pioneer Square in search of

stories about the city. When asked in 1997 what she thought of

U R B A N  R E N E W A L  I N  I N D I A N  T E R R I T O R Y  /  1 7 9



Day/Night, Margaret, a homeless Aleut woman, referred to it simply

as “fucking white man bullshit.” To some extent, she was right. With-

out the crowds who frequent historic Pioneer Square, Day/Night would

have little meaning and even less of an audience. And perhaps most

importantly, it says what many expected all along: that Indians and cities

cannot coexist. After all, Heap of Birds took his piece’s title from one

version of the Chief Seattle Speech: “Day and night cannot dwell

together. The red man has ever fled the approach of the white man, as

the changing mist on the mountainside flees before the blazing sun.”

In both English and the first language of this place called Seattle, here

again is what we mistake for history: a place-story telling us what we

already thought we knew.29

D
aybreak star, day/night: two astronomical metaphors,

speaking radically different place-stories. One tells us: This

city is Indian land. The other: This city is no place for Indians.

Their conflicting tales of the connections between Native

people and the city capture the conflicts inherent in urban Indian his-

tory: What does it mean to be Native in the city? Can people even be Native

in the city? And what about the fact that, throughout Seattle’s history,

whether during the creation of the ship canal or the ouster of Native

Skid Road, civic leaders seemed determined to make the city into a place

that was no place for Indians? The story of Indian activism in the city

and the destruction of Indian Skid Road can be understood only in the

context of the changing nature of Seattle itself. Before the Second World

War, Seattle was a city of lumber mills, racial segregation, and Skid Road.

Fifty years later, it was city of white-collar industry, multicultural poli-

tics, and urban renaissance, in which reinvestment in city-hood meant

both the creation of institutions like the Indian Center and Daybreak

Star and the destruction of an Indian neighborhood in the name of his-

toric preservation. As in earlier periods in Seattle’s past, changes in the

city led to new possibilities and challenges for the Native American com-

munity, just as changes in Seattle’s Native community led to new urban

stories. For all their complexity, these stories together attest to a single,

clear fact: that Indian history can, and does, happen in urban places.

1 8 0



More than thirty years after the invasion of Fort Lawton, new sto-

ries are still being written. In 1970, there were some four thousand Indi-

ans in the city; by the end of the century, there were nearly three times

that number. Despite the rise in Native population, though, voluntary

groups like the Service League had begun to fade soon after the suc-

cesses of the 1970s. “Indian people were more able to get jobs and edu-

cation and so forth,” recalled Marilyn Bentz, with the result that “the

volunteers weren’t as necessary.” Meanwhile, the radical activism that

had helped reconfigure civic politics faded as well, as life in the city got

better and ethnic institutions became more bureaucratic.30

But challenges remained, and at the beginning of the twenty-first

century, the range of Native organizations in Seattle attests both to the

ongoing pressure to reconcile what it means to be Indian with what it

means to be urban, and to the amazing capacity of the Indian community

to respond to its members’ needs. At Daybreak Star, United Indians of

All Tribes offers Head Start classes, foster-care advocacy, culturally appro-

priate therapy, outpatient treatment for substance abuse, GED (general

equivalency diploma) courses, and housing referrals, in addition to its

annual powwow and an ongoing art market. The Seattle Indian Health

Board—housed in a building named after Leschi—offers medical and

dental services and coordinates access to traditional healers. A group

called Queer Oyate supports Native people with HIV and AIDS, while

the Chief Seattle Club, founded without permission by a Jesuit priest

in the 1960s to serve homeless Indians in Pioneer Square, still man-

ages to operate among the galleries and nightclubs. There are even a

couple of Indian bars in town. Meanwhile, the Service League is under-

going a renaissance of its own, with members involved in virtually every

aspect of the community, and the I-Wa-Sil youth group has recently

formed the nation’s first urban Indian Boys and Girls Club. All speak

to the enormous creativity and strength of Native people in Seattle,

according to Lawney Reyes, the architect of Daybreak Star:

I’m very proud of the survival of urban people. The government, they’re still

scratching their head. . . . We’re supposed to be extinct by the help of our

own government. And somehow we have managed to survive even when

U R B A N  R E N E W A L  I N  I N D I A N  T E R R I T O R Y  /  1 8 1



Native people have been placed in environments that are unlivable. We still

find a place to create home.

All that was unlivable—the benches in Occidental Park, the dingy

rooms in the Morrison Hotel, the projects at High Point—is being

transformed.31

Perhaps the most ironic result of that transformation, and of Seat-

tle’s urban Indian story, comes from this place itself: from ideas about

the connections between Indians and nature and from the simple fact

that the city’s Native community, made up of families and individuals

from scores of tribes, has grown up on territory that once belonged to

other Native people. Back in 1970, Bernie Whitebear had played the

nature card: “If we’re allowed to take over this land we would leave it

in its natural state,” he told the press at Fort Lawton. “We wouldn’t destroy

the natural areas there. We would preserve the land, the way the Indi-

ans have always done.” Later, when Daybreak Star finally opened, the

progressive Seattle Weekly saw the new facility as part of an “Indian

Renaissance” that would lead to preservation of the earth. But twenty

years later, the idea of Indians as inherent environmentalists would come

back to haunt Daybreak Star when United Indians of All Tribes pro-

posed building conference and museum facilities—a People’s Lodge—

in Discovery Park. Concerned over aesthetics, parking, and open-space

preservation, local non-Indian residents highlighted the plans’ seem-

ing betrayal of “Indian environmental values.” Having played the ecol-

ogy card in their claims to Fort Lawton, the founders of Daybreak Star

were now held accountable to the stereotype of the ecological Indian.32

In responding to the complaints just before his death in 2000, White-

bear unwittingly highlighted the deepest irony about an urban Indian

community built on indigenous land. “From the window of my office,”

he wrote in the Seattle Times, “I look north from Magnolia Bluff and

imagine the warriors of the Haida Nation who once paddled their great

canoes into Puget Sound and beached them on the shores below in what

is now called Shilshole Bay.” Thinking of those ancestors, he recalled

the words attributed to Seeathl that claimed that the white man would

never be alone in the city. But Whitebear neglected to mention that those

1 8 2



ancient Haida warriors had been raiders, come to enslave and kill the

Shilsholes. And so the place-story of one urban Indian activist came

into conflict with another kind of place-story that had been rising dur-

ing the same years. For while Seattle’s urban Indian community had

been making a place for themselves in the city, other Indian voices—

the descendants of the indigenous people of Seattle—were also laying

claim to the city.33

U R B A N  R E N E W A L  I N  I N D I A N  T E R R I T O R Y  /  1 8 3


























10 / The Returning Hosts

T
he seattle spirit, the story of a city’s birth in pioneer

stalwartness, could take its adherents in strange new directions.

On the centennial of the landing at Alki, it could lead them

into the Cold War. The Founders Day celebrations of 1951 were

like those in the past, full of pomp and pageantry. Some celebrants

attended performances of “The Landing of the Calico Pioneers” followed

by baton twirling and a “God Bless America” sing-along at the Alki Field

House, while more studious participants visited City Hall to view the

city’s original charter and various other “musty old files.” And like other

Founders Days, the centerpiece of the centennial was a reenactment

of the Denny Party’s landing, where junior high school boys in badly

dyed wigs played Indian, awaiting the arrival of grown-ups playing pio-

neer. As the founders strode ashore, Mayor William Devin smashed a

bottle containing the commingled waters of Seattle’s lakes and rivers

against the Alki Monument, the Hiawatha Sparklers did an “Indian

dance,” and serial salute bombs closed the program.1

The reenactment of the landing at Alki was the heart of the centennial

program, but its headliner was General Douglas MacArthur. Thousands

of Seattleites went to the University of Washington the next day to hear

him extol the lessons of Alki Point. He told his audience that Seattle

had been the “full beneficiary of what the pioneering spirit has wrought

upon this continent” but warned that said spirit was still very much

needed. “Should the pioneering spirit cease to dominate the American

character,” MacArthur continued, “our national progress would end. For

a nation’s life is never static. It must advance or it will recede.” Invok-

ing long-standing anxieties about the loss of the frontier, the man who

so famously strode ashore in the Philippines proposed an agenda for

1 8 4



the nation: “To the early pioneer the Pacific Coast marked the end of his

courageous westerly advance—to us it should mark but the beginning.

To him it delimited our western frontier—to us that frontier has been

moved beyond the Pacific horizon.” Broadcast on national television—

one of Seattle’s first appearances in the medium—MacArthur’s speech

linked the Seattle Spirit to the nation’s interests in the Pacific. The story

of Seattle’s birth in a wilderness with its own “red menace” could now

resonate for a new generation, and the Seattle Spirit, always linked to

the nation’s own place-story, helped lead the nation, for better or mostly

for worse, into new places around the world.2

For all its historical rhetoric, MacArthur’s speech had little to do with

the past and much more to do with the future. It was much like another

centennial event: the burying of a time capsule on Alki Beach. The cap-

sule’s contents were not listed in the Post-Intelligencer story announc-

ing its burial, but the author’s vision of the future was richly detailed.

Seattleites might, for example, “shoot over” to Alki Point in their “per-

sonal atomic cruisers” to watch the opening of the time capsule on 13

November 2051. “We’ll probably be wearing a spun air afternoon dress

with radium buttons,” imagined journalist Dorothy Hart, “and nary a

qualm about the weather! Before the days of atmospheric control, we

understand, Seattle women carried umbrellas!” Here was Seattle’s

space age future, full of technocratic optimism and personal affluence

despite threats abroad. Here was a Seattle that had escaped its past (not

to mention its ecology).3

Although surely tongue in cheek, Hart’s vision of twenty-first-century

Seattle reflected its time, that period in the 1950s when consensus pol-

itics, consumer confidence, and scientific progress augured a bright

future for Americans. In the years to come, however, history would inter-

vene. The consensus would crack as social unrest transformed public

discourses on race, inspired in part by the unjust ways in which post-

war affluence had been distributed. The American Indian Women’s

Service League and United Indians of All Tribes made that point beau-

tifully. Meanwhile, Hart’s atomic cruisers and radium dress buttons

would come to seem like naïve paeans to a nuclear industry that, only

a few short decades after its inception, was seen by many to be an eco-

T H E  R E T U R N I N G  H O S T S  /  1 8 5



logical nightmare. Instead of a nuclear-powered, climate-controlled,

deracinated futuropolis, Seattle became a place where both multicul-

tural politics and environmental anxieties dominated much of postwar

civic life.

Most important to our story, the legacy of Seattle’s urban and Native

histories would come back to haunt the city in the postwar era. As in

the apocryphal Chief Seattle Speech, the white man—and all the other

new people here, including urban Indians from other places—would

“never be alone.” But it was not the ghosts of Seattle’s indigenous people

that returned to the city: it was their living descendants. Fueled by both

the new activism shared by other urban Indians and growing unease

about the legacies of urban conquest, the grandchildren and great-grand-

children of the Duwamish and Shilsholes and Lakes began to exert new

influences over both urban environmental affairs and the civic story.

By the late twentieth century, even if Seattle continued to use Indian

imagery to market itself on the global stage, it could no longer easily

do so without taking into account the city’s real Native past. It appeared

that Seeathl’s “returning hosts” had indeed come back to town, in ways

that MacArthur and the Hiawatha Sparklers never could have imagined. 

F
rom elvis presley movies to reruns of the popular tele-

vision series Frasier, the Space Needle has replaced Princess

Angeline (and perhaps even her father) as the symbol of Seat-

tle. Rising hundreds of feet over where Denny Hill once stood

before it was washed away by the regrades, it symbolizes the squeaky-

clean, nervous optimism of the Camelot-and-Apollo 1960s expressed

at Seattle’s second world’s fair, the Century 21 Exposition, for which the

Space Needle was built. The fair’s logo was a circle topped by an arrow

pointing skyward (the symbol for masculinity, as the city’s budding fem-

inists pointed out), and along with the Space Needle, Century 21’s exhibits

reflected Americans’ unswerving faith in the future. At the World of

Tomorrow, the Bubbleator carried fairgoers to showcases of personal

gyrocopters, interoffice “micro-mail,” and kitchens that washed them-

selves. At the World of Science extravaganza, visitors were taken on a

ten-minute expedition into outer space, while in the adult-entertain-

1 8 6



ment area of the exposition men could snap photos of nude “Girls of

the Galaxy.” When the fair received its second Life magazine cover in

May 1962, showing the futuristic Monorail streaking along with the

Space Needle rising in the background, it was described as being “out

of this world,” and there was some truth to this. For six months and

ten million guests, the fair had captured the ethos of the era, in which

ecological and technological constraints—even gravity itself—seemed

a thing of the past.4

But less than a decade later, something had shifted: Seattle had

become ecotopian. In truth, well before the 1975 publication of Ernest

Callenbach’s mediocre but wildly popular utopian novel Ecotopia, in

which Seattle, Portland, and San Francisco became the centers of a seces-

sionist nation organized around environmentalist principles, Seattle’s

culture of nature was undergoing a radical transformation.5 Con-

fronted by the pollution attendant to rapid urban and suburban growth,

and fueled by a growing emphasis on health, aesthetics, and an out-

door lifestyle, Seattleites began in the late 1950s to undertake massive

campaigns to undo environmental damage in and around the city.

Cleaning up Lake Washington, protecting green spaces, and enhanc-

ing salmon runs became major civic projects, while Seattle became a

haven for environmentalist organizations that hoped to change policy

throughout the region and beyond. By the 1970s, these efforts had helped

to shape an environmentalist ethic in Seattle that, if by no means mono-

lithic, dramatically reoriented the city’s self-image. Gone was the Seat-

tle that prided itself on lumber mills and regrades and rail connections;

in its place was one of the few cities in the world that one moved to in

order to get closer to nature. Now, the Space Needle simply offered the

best view of Sound and mountains.6

Few things reflected this cultural shift more, or had more implica-

tions for Native people, than the symbolic resuscitation of Chief Seat-

tle. Just as Seattle the city was born again as an environmentally friendly

metropolis in the 1970s, Seeathl the symbolic Indian was reborn as well.

More than the city’s patron saint, he now became the city’s first envi-

ronmentalist. This was not just a local phenomenon. Following the

publication of an augmented version of the speech in which Seeathl

T H E  R E T U R N I N G  H O S T S  /  1 8 7



anachronistically mourned the coming of the railroad and the passing

of the buffalo, the words attributed to the Native leader became famous

around the world, particularly among European environmentalists, pro-

gressive Christians concerned with human rights, and some Native

rights activists. Soon, the city’s public image became closely linked to

the ostensible environmental message of its namesake, as well as to a

growing concern for the predicament of Indian peoples.7

But the question remained: who was Seeathl now being asked to

serve? While many Native peoples, and in particular Puget Sound area

tribes, used the Chief Seattle Speech as evidence of their claim to the

lands in and around Seattle, for many non-Indians, the words of the

long-dead indigenous leader had a different purpose. Theologian and

ecophilosopher Thomas Berry, for example, found the speech to be a

“profound insight into the enduring trauma being shaped in the psy-

chic depths of the white man,” referring particularly to the prophecy

that settler society would never be alone and would be haunted by Indian

ghosts. “These voices are there in the wind, in the unconscious depths

of our minds,” Berry continued. “These voices are there not primarily

to indict us for our cruelties, but to identify our distortions in our rela-

tions to the land and its inhabitants, and also to guide us toward a mutu-

ally enhancing human-earth relationship.”8 For all their sympathy

toward indigenous people, Berry’s words were statements about his-

tory and about power. The words attributed to Seeathl were not about

conflict but about healing, and at their core, they were most valuable,

not in how they could serve Seeathl’s own people or in how they might

bring to light the injustices of the past, but in how they might assuage

the environmental ills of modern American society. As has so often been

the case in Seattle’s history, stories that non-Indians told about Native

people were in fact not about Native people but about non-Indians.

But beginning in the late 1960s, something new was happening.

Whereas, in the past, whites and others had often been able to tell sto-

ries about Indians and the city without taking into account actual Native

American people and their concerns, new political, legal, and cultural

developments brought Indian people back into the center of urban life.

Seattle’s ecotopian turn was accompanied by a parallel resurgence in

1 8 8



Native American activism—not just among the urban Indians of the

Service League and United Indians of All Tribes but among local tribes

as well. These developments allowed the very real descendants of Seeathl

and their tribal compatriots to assert a new kind of influence over the

city. As new ideas about nature and progress came to dominate Seattle’s

civic consciousness, local tribes achieved a new degree of control over

their ancient territories as ecological stewards and protectors of cultural

patrimony, even if those territories had been changed irrevocably.

That local tribes would come to be seen as urban environmental stew-

ards seemed unlikely in the 1960s, when members of the Muckleshoot

Tribe, whose reservation was upstream from Seattle (and whose pop-

ulation included some descendants of the Duwamish), became scape-

goats for the depletion of salmon runs. Criminalization of indigenous

subsistence practices, begun decades earlier, continued well into the

postwar period. In 1963, for example, Harold E. Miller, director of the

new regional environmental and planning entity known as METRO,

characterized the gillnetting practiced by Muckleshoots upstream from

the city as anathema to urban environmental restoration. Miller claimed

in the Seattle Times that “all we have done in the Duwamish is being

offset by this [fishing] activity.” Never mind urban development and

the wholesale transformation of local rivers; the disappearance of the

fish was clearly the Indians’ fault.9

Beginning in the late 1960s, however, Native people became increas-

ingly defiant about the state-sponsored repression of treaty fishing rights

and staged fish-ins throughout Puget Sound and even in and around

Seattle, bringing salmon conservation and human rights to center stage

in local, national, and international media. One morning in the early

1970s, for example, Muckleshoot fishermen convened on the shore of

Lake Washington with members of the American Indian Movement

and with other Northwest tribes. “Makahs were prepared to die for our

cause,” recalled Gilbert King George, and until the drums and songs

of the protestors convinced the well-armed fish and game wardens to

back down, violence seemed imminent. The presence of the American

Indian Movement, the National Indian Youth Council, and other allies

also spurred fish-ins on the tidal Duwamish. “By then, our group was

T H E  R E T U R N I N G  H O S T S  /  1 8 9



growing and growing, and we outnumbered the state agents,” King

George remembered. “What’s one or two guys mean when they come

down the river banks, and we are about 12, 18 ornery old Indian people,

standing up for what they firmly believed in?” The fish-ins brought

together many strands of Seattle’s Native community: one Muckleshoot

activist recalled that she already knew most of the American Indian Move-

ment people from her days on Skid Road, and the American Indian

Women’s Service League got involved as well, publishing articles about

fishing rights in Indian Center News. So while urban Indians and local

tribes had very different histories in this place, this place also brought

them together in defense of Native rights as a shared principle.10

Meanwhile, many non-Indian Seattleites had come to support treaty

fishing rights, thanks in part to the savvy media techniques of Indian

activists. By 1974, when George Boldt, U.S. District Court judge, finally

ruled in favor of the tribes in United States v. Washington, ordering the

state to allocate half the harvestable salmon to treaty tribes, many Seat-

tle residents (with the noticeable exception of the city’s large commer-

cial fishing industry) had in fact already become outspoken advocates

of both tribal sovereignty and a new, socially informed approach to con-

servation. Throughout the “fish fights,” progressive churches, civil-rights

organizations, and other groups decried the arrests and intimidation

faced by tribal members and played critical roles in garnering support

for fishing rights. By the 1980s, Seattle had become a center of pro-

Indian and pro-environment sentiment, perhaps best symbolized in the

formal apology for cultural genocide and religious oppression that was

issued by Seattle-area churches in 1987.11

These new urban attitudes toward nature and Native peoples were

often linked to each other through the increasingly iconic image of the

salmon, a connection that had lasting implications for tribal authority

in the city in the years to come. The Muckleshoots and Suquamish, fed-

erally recognized tribes whose membership included many descendants

of the indigenous people of Seattle, began to assert themselves as stew-

ards of Seattle’s environment. They focused their attentions in partic-

ular on fisheries, empowered both by Boldt’s ruling and by Seattle’s

1 9 0



growing urban environmental ethos. In 1982, for example, the tribes

intervened against the proposed Seacrest Marina, a $13 million project

that would have occupied 1,600 feet of shoreline between Duwamish

Head and the mouth of the Duwamish. Tribal concerns over the impact

on fisheries, along with opposition from urban environmentalists, led

to the scrapping of the Seacrest proposal. Despite opposition from devel-

opers, right-wing ideologues, and many commercial fishermen, tribal

efforts to manage urban nature earned positive reviews from environ-

mental organizations and the mainstream press. When the Muck-

leshoots created a tribal fishing reserve in Elliott Bay in 1988, for instance,

the Seattle Times referred to the tribe as a “fine conservation example,”

a total reversal of the scapegoating so common only twenty years ear-

lier. In the fourteen years since the Boldt decision, tribes had exerted

their authority over environmental issues just as those issues were com-

ing to dominate civic consciousness. In the city named for an indige-

nous man now thought of as its “first environmentalist,” Native

authority had returned.12

But, like other developments in Seattle’s postwar Indian history, the

path to tribal control over urban places had its ironies. For example, the

Treaty of Point Elliott was the legal basis for tribal fishing in the waters

in and around Seattle. The treaty assured Indians access to the “usual

and accustomed” places and resources that their ancestors had man-

aged for millennia. But those places had often been transformed

beyond recognition by urban development. As Muckleshoot fishing nets

tangled with pleasure boats in the Lake Washington Ship Canal in the

1980s, for instance, they did so in a waterway that did not exist at the

time of the treaty. The same engineering marvels that had destroyed

indigenous subsistence in and around Seattle had also created a new

and spectacular fishery that was neither usual nor accustomed. Simi-

larly, tribes and their environmentalist allies won major concessions in

a sixty-five-acre marina development on the north shore of Elliott Bay—

concessions that included tribe-operated pens for up to one million

farmed coho salmon. If tribal concerns sprang out of historic connec-

tions with the indigenous landscape, their modern manifestation some-

T H E  R E T U R N I N G  H O S T S  /  1 9 1



times bore little relation to the indigenous geography of salmon.

Finally, despite tribal claims on the city’s environment and a strong envi-

ronmentalist ethic among many Seattleites, by the end of the twenti-

eth century, the salmon were almost gone; indeed, some of them had

been placed on the Endangered Species List. For all the power local tribes

had gained over urban nature, the city’s environmental history had not

been reversed. And resentments over the new tribal authority contin-

ued to simmer: when the Muckleshoots legally killed two sea lions that

had been devastating salmon runs at the ship canal locks, the tribe

received threats, including one warning that an Indian would be killed

for every dead sea lion. The hunt also brought the tribe into conflict

with environmentalists; the Progressive Animal Welfare Society and

the Humane Society were among the hunt’s most outspoken critics.

Indians as symbols of nature were one thing; Indians as real-life hunters

in the city were quite another.13

The Muckleshoots and Suquamish emerged from the fish-ins and

other wranglings of the 1960s and 1970s as legally enfranchised stake-

holders in the urban environment. As federally recognized tribes, they

asserted their treaty rights and sought, in many cases successfully, to

become comanagers of significant elements of the urban environment.

By the end of the twentieth century, the two tribes had become stew-

ards of Seattle’s waterways and shorelines, even if those places had been

transformed almost beyond recognition. While their ascendancy was

related to a broader national—even international—movement toward

tribal self-determination beginning in the 1970s, local forces, includ-

ing urban ones, had also helped to set the stage for this new develop-

ment. Their activism, while rooted in their own reservation experiences,

was also influenced and supported by Indian allies whose traditions of

protest had grown out of the more radical, multicultural, urban work

of groups like United Indians of All Tribes. Meanwhile, their successes,

in the public eye if not necessarily the courtroom, hinged to no small

degree on the fact that the non-Indian Seattleites, questioning the social

and environmental legacies of their city’s growth, seemed readier than

ever before to acknowledge tribal peoples as having a stake in envi-

ronmental management. But the Suquamish and Muckleshoots were

1 9 2



not the only local Indians to place new claims on Seattle in the late twen-

tieth century. 

T
he boldt decision, as United States v. Washington soon

came to be known, was a stunning victory for the people whose

ancestors had settled the shores of Salt Water millennia ear-

lier. It was also a victory for indigenous peoples around the

world: its basic premise—that indigenous peoples, by definition, have

unique claims on their territories—has become the basis for success-

ful legal arguments throughout the United States as well as in Canada,

Australia, and New Zealand. At the same time, it also set local tribes

against each other, creating legal conflicts over shared or overlapping

traditional territories. The Duwamish Tribe, including descendants of

the Lakes and Shilsholes, had been involved in land claims cases

throughout the twentieth century, its members giving testimony along-

side relatives and allies from reservations at Muckleshoot, Tulalip,

Suquamish, and elsewhere. But in many ways, the Duwamish had always

been different, for one simple reason: their territory included the

Pacific Northwest’s largest city and the region’s most valuable real estate.

Arbiters of Indian law rarely recognized that value; after decades wait-

ing for settlement of their claims, Duwamish tribal members each

received $64 in 1971 for lands in what was now Seattle. 

But for the Duwamish, a greater offense was yet to come. In 1979,

five years after his decision in United States v. Washington, Judge Boldt

determined that the Duwamish and four other Puget Sound Native com-

munities no longer met all of the seven criteria required for inclusion

on the list of tribes eligible for treaty fishing rights. In the case of the

Duwamish, the disqualifier was an apparent ten-year break in the tribe’s

political leadership (one of the seven criteria required showing con-

tinuous tribal organization from the signing of a treaty to the present).

The decade in question stretched from 1916 to 1925, the years imme-

diately after the completion of the Lake Washington Ship Canal and

the destruction of the Black River, where many Duwamish people had

still been living. The chaos of those years now had its consequences

some six decades later. The modern-day Duwamish officially ceased to

T H E  R E T U R N I N G  H O S T S  /  1 9 3



exist in the eyes of the federal government and thus were considered

to have no legal claim over the city named for their ancestral leader.

(Never mind that government agents had included the Duwamish dur-

ing discussions of proposed tribal termination policies of the 1950s.)14

Bureaucratic extinction is one thing; actual disappearance is quite

another. So while the decision to extinguish Duwamish treaty status

might have been a massive blow to the tribe’s claims, it also opened

new doors in terms of public sentiment. During the same years that

the Muckleshoots and Suquamish were angling—literally—for control

over the city’s environment, the Duwamish, even without federal recog-

nition, laid their own claims on Seattle. Stripped of legal authority, the

Duwamish capitalized on changes in what it meant to be urban—most

notably, the ascent of environmentalism and multiculturalism in civic

politics and new ideas about history—to assert a kind of cultural

authority. In doing so, they would not only challenge their own alleged

extinction but capsize the city’s very story of itself.

The Duwamish River was a place utterly transformed by 1975, the

year after United States v. Washington. Only a single curve of the indige-

nous estuary still existed, near the place where Seetoowathl and his wife

had starved half a century earlier. This backwater bend sheltered by a

sliver of scrubby island was all that remained of the once-fecund inter-

face between river and Salt Water. For some, though, even that was too

much “unproductive” nature: in 1975, the Port of Seattle proposed to

dredge and fill it to make way for a new container ship terminal. Dur-

ing initial surveying, an Army Corps of Engineers archaeologist identi-

fied the riverbank—then sporting five dilapidated houses—as a site of

significance; historical documents and shell middens suggested that the

site had once been an indigenous town. It appeared that the Duwamish

village of Basketry Hat had been rediscovered. But in early 1976, the

Port made a mistake. While demolishing the old houses, a bulldozer

operator obliterated most of the archaeological layers at the site. Almost

immediately, the local press blasted the Port for destroying a crucial piece

of Seattle’s heritage. (Business and maritime editors were less outraged;

one longed rather confusingly for the days “when there were many more

acres of clams here and digging for those clams was the only dig that

1 9 4



man worried about.”) In its own defense, the Port contended that it did

not know the houses were on top of the archaeological site, and since

public corporations could not be sued, it could not be held accountable

anyway. These excuses did little to satisfy those who saw the Port’s actions

as the wanton destruction of civic patrimony.15

Then Cecile Maxwell stepped into the fray. As the young chairwoman

of the Duwamish Tribe, Maxwell was, like many Indian leaders in her

generation, including Bernie Whitebear, unafraid of controversy and

extremely media savvy. Her own activism, however, was also shaped

by her family’s connections to local places and by watching, for exam-

ple, her brother being arrested for fishing on the Duwamish. Soon after

the bulldozer had done its work in 1975, Maxwell used her anger and

expertise to begin telling a new kind of place-story. With the help of

other Duwamish tribal members and allies in the local press, Maxwell

connected what had happened at Basketry Hat to broader urban and

Native narratives. In one interview, for example, she lamented that “we

have no culture left, no history left. That’s because we have no land

base,” linking the Port’s blunder to a longer history of dispossession.

Meanwhile, activist and journalist Terry Tafoya pointed out in the Post-

Intelligencer that Europeans “were in the dark ages” when the longhouses

of Basketry Hat were built and that “perhaps a thousand years from

now, Indians will discover the decaying remains of the Space Needle.”

For their part, the Post-Intelligencer’s editorial staff noted that the pio-

neers who arrived at Alki Point were “Johnny and Janie-come-latelies,”

going on to ask, “Who says that Seattle was founded in 1851?” And when

the dig went public in 1978 with free tours, the site was interpreted as

“a boon, not only to the public, but also to the Duwamish people” and

presented a chance “to learn about the way of life of the Duwamish

people, whose past has almost been completely wiped out by a grow-

ing city.”16

Here, then, was the overturning of Seattle’s narrative. Like the

“treaty” read at Fort Lawton or the fish-ins on Lake Washington, these

were new kinds of public place-stories about Seattle and about urban

meaning and often seemed to arise directly out of the ground itself. In

1994, for example, construction crews disturbed cultural deposits

T H E  R E T U R N I N G  H O S T S  /  1 9 5



while building a new sewage treatment plant at West Point. Builders

immediately halted construction and allowed excavation to take place

under tribal oversight and at a cost of one month and $3.5 million. Post-

Intelligencer arts writer Solveig Torvik noted that Seattle residents and

the tribes would be “inestimably poorer” if sites like West Point were

destroyed; as at the lauded opening of Daybreak Star, civic and Indian

goals appeared to merge. But tensions remained. In early 1998, while

digging footings for the new Seattle World Trade Center, a Port worker

discovered a woman’s skull attached to a piling. Having learned from

past mistakes, the Port stopped work and contacted the Suquamish and

Muckleshoots, but they neglected to notify the Duwamish, who learned

of the discovery only through the media. Under the leadership of Cecile

Maxwell—actually, now known as Cecile Hansen—the Duwamish

picketed the dig. “Seattle promotes itself as a place of great cultural sen-

sitivity,” Hansen told a Seattle Times reporter. “I am here to tell you this

cultural sensitivity has not been measurably extended to Seattle’s

indigenous Duwamish Tribe and its people.” Even though the nature

of Seattle’s relationship to its indigenous past had changed, for some

that change had not gone nearly far enough.17

Still, the fact that the Duwamish, with no legal standing as a tribe,

were able to garner significant media attention and public sympathy

spoke to the cultural authority they had acquired in Seattle’s urban imag-

ination. That attention and sympathy increased in the new millennium

as the Duwamish worked to have their federal recognition reinstated.

Working with local archivists and historians, they sutured together the

alleged ten-year break in tribal organization using oral histories, Catho-

lic Church records, and genealogical research. Recognizing the disrup-

tions caused by environmental transformation, the Duwamish argued

that what seemed like a break in organization was in fact simply a change

from one generation of tribal leadership to another within a single,

identifiable Duwamish community. Their argument must have been

convincing: on the last day of the Clinton administration, Cecile Hansen

received a phone call from the Bureau of Indian Affairs, telling her that

the Duwamish had been recognized. The victory was short-lived, how-

ever; only a few days later, the new Bureau of Indian Affairs adminis-

1 9 6



trator appointed by George W. Bush informed Hansen that the deci-

sion had been reversed. Stunned, Hansen, other members of the

Duwamish Tribe, and their allies vented their anger in the local press.

But the greatest opportunity to express their outrage was yet to come:

fifty years after MacArthur’s speech, Seattle was about to celebrate its

150th birthday.18

The coverage of the Duwamish recognition fracas, which included

front-page stories in local papers as well as some international cover-

age, dovetailed with the run-up to the sesquicentennial of Seattle’s found-

ing. By November 2001, it was clear that it would no longer be possible

to tell Seattle’s story without the participation of Native people and in

particular without the Duwamish. And so when actors playing the Denny

Party came ashore in a drenching rain at Alki that 13 November, they

were welcomed not only by hundreds of spectators as in past reenact-

ments but by Cecile Hansen and other representatives from the

Duwamish Tribe. After a series of speeches, many of which noted the

tribe’s recognition struggle, city leaders unveiled two new plaques at

the Alki Monument: one commemorating the women of the group, the

other honoring the Duwamish who had made survival at New York–Alki

possible. Meanwhile, at a luncheon attended by members of the Denny,

Bell, Boren, Terry, and Low families, Ruth Moore, the great-granddaughter

of John and Lydia Low, told those gathered that “we need to let the fed-

eral government know that those Indians made the city possible—and

I love them for it.”19

Sesquicentennial events often emphasized either the positive inter-

actions between pioneers and Native people in the first months of set-

tlement or the multicultural sentiments of the late twentieth and early

twenty-first centuries. They left out much of what had happened in

between: the burning of the longhouses, the attempts to keep Indians

out of town, the fish fights. In crafting a new, multicultural place-story,

anniversary organizers had perhaps stilled the Manichean heart of the

Seattle Spirit, but they had also whitewashed much of Seattle’s real his-

tory. On a handful of occasions, however, a more confrontational ver-

sion of Seattle’s urban story rose to the surface. As part of a local museum

exhibit, Anne Overacker Rasmussen described the shame she had once

T H E  R E T U R N I N G  H O S T S  /  1 9 7



felt at being Duwamish, even in a city named for one of her Duwamish

ancestors: at long last, memories of “No Dogs or Indians Allowed” were

creeping into the mainstream urban narrative. Meanwhile, at the pio-

neer family reunion, historian David Buerge, who had helped craft the

Duwamish petition for recognition, pointed out that “if the Duwamish

had a nickel for everyone who said something should be done for them,

they could afford to buy back a considerable chunk of [Seattle].” He thus

highlighted the difference between honoring the city’s Indian past and

addressing its Indian present. And at a sesquicentennial Rotary lunch-

eon, Duwamish tribal member James Rasmussen balked at reciting the

speech attributed to Seeathl. “The Duwamish are staring down the maw

of extinction while you talk of progress. I won’t do this,” he told them

before abruptly walking off the stage. And as the final event of the year-

long sesquicentennial, Duwamish tribal members welcomed canoes full

of Indian people from many tribes ashore at a new city park at the site

of Basketry Hat, asserting their status as guardians of their traditional

homeland.20

The sesquicentennial might have ended, but the efforts of the

Duwamish to obtain federal recognition did not. After a series of

inquiries into criminal wrongdoing in the Bureau of Indian Affairs dur-

ing both the Clinton and the Bush administrations, the issue came to

down to technicalities: when a particular set of papers was signed and

whether those papers were drafts or final copies. Finally, in the spring

of 2002, Interior Secretary Gale Norton reaffirmed the government’s

position against recognition despite a concerted campaign on the part

of Seattle-area religious organizations and other Duwamish allies. These

included more than six dozen descendants of Seattle pioneers, who

signed a petition calling for the creation of the Duwamish reservation

that their ancestors had petitioned against more than a century earlier.

Meanwhile, federally recognized tribes in the area had staked out a wide

range of positions on Duwamish recognition. The Suquamish across

Puget Sound supported it; the Tulalip Tribes to the north said they would

not fight it, having lost a similar battle with the Snoqualmie Tribe in

the 1990s; and the Muckleshoots announced plans to fight Duwamish

recognition should it ever be granted through an act of Congress, the

1 9 8



only option left. This would be the great irony of United States v. Wash-

ington: in settling old disputes, it had opened new legal, political, and

cultural rifts in the city and beyond. Meanwhile, the forces of urban

dispossession that had rendered the Duwamish invisible in the early

twentieth century continued to have powerful effects in the twenty-first.21

The Duwamish have continued their efforts to carve out a place in

the city. With the financial support of individual donors, companies,

and local governments, Cecile Hansen and her group purchased land

on West Marginal Way, just across the street from Basketry Hat, with

plans to build a longhouse and cultural center. “This longhouse won’t

just be for us,” Hansen told a reporter the summer before the sesqui-

centennial. “It will be for everyone who lives in and visits Seattle.” As

with Bernie Whitebear’s People’s Lodge and Edgar Heap of Birds’ Day/

Night, a large part of being Indian in modern Seattle involved showing

yourself to non-Indians on your own terms. The Duwamish longhouse,

once built, would be a way for one Indian community to tell its place-

stories to a larger community that finally appeared to be listening. Recog-

nition and a reservation, however, seem farther away than ever.22

B
ack in 1925, boosters ruled the day. Only aging pioneers

and a few Indian people saw fit to question Seattle’s rise to met-

ropolitan primacy, and their accounts of vanquished spirit pow-

ers and bucolic village life were not often heard among the

shouts and bellows of the advocates of metropolis. One of those

cheechakos, his name now lost to history, scripted one of the thousands

of promotional brochures that beckoned visitors to look around, settle

down, and buy in. He began with his own encounter with the city: “First

impression! As I found her so will I always think of Seattle. As young

and eager. Life still the great unexplored; living still the great adven-

ture. With no old past to stop and worship; no dead men’s bones to reckon

with; no traditions chained to her ankles.” Here, then, was the prevailing

place-story of the modern era (and not just in Seattle): that the past was

irrelevant (although it had been a great adventure), that only the future

lay ahead of the city and nation, that all negative consequences of mod-

ern urban life would be outweighed by the benefits. No old bones.23

T H E  R E T U R N I N G  H O S T S  /  1 9 9



Not so; just ask Jan Deeds and Ron Mandt. Three quarters of a cen-

tury after that anonymous promoter crowed about Seattle’s freedom from

the past, laborers unearthed old bones—two adults and a child, to be

exact—while repairing the foundation of Deeds and Mandt’s home near

Alki Point. As work came to a halt and the coroner was called, the home-

owners soon learned that this was not the first time Indian graves had

been disturbed here. Half a century before, an earlier resident had expe-

rienced “a little excitement” when he found bones under the house. In

those days, aside from meriting a bemused article in the Seattle Times,

such a discovery carried no consequences. But for Deeds and Mandt,

who lived in a very different Seattle at the beginning of the twenty-first

century and were trying to sell their house, there were definite conse-

quences, which they bore with great decency: calls to the Suquamish

and Muckleshoot tribes (but not to the Duwamish), thousands of dol-

lars paid to privately hired archaeologists, and buyers who withdrew

their offer. Finally reburied in accordance with tribal wishes and the

state’s Indian Graves and Records Act, the family first laid to rest here

long ago showed that there are, in fact, old bones to reckon with in Seat-

tle. Boosters may still run the show, but at least now they have to share

the stage. Word has gotten around: the past has consequences.24

The central challenge of Seattle’s Native histories, however, has been

to acknowledge those consequences. The struggles of the Duwamish

Tribe in the last quarter of the twentieth century typify the tensions inher-

ent in Seattle’s Native pasts. On the one hand, they show the lasting

social and environmental consequences of the city’s urban development.

On the other hand, the attention the Duwamish received at the end of

the century, and especially around the time of the sesquicentennial,

shows the metaphorical place some Native people have come to occupy

in the urban imagination: as environmental stewards, as indictments

of injustice, and as indigenous hosts of civic history. And so we return

to the central problem of Seattle’s Native pasts: the distance between

the imagined Indian in the city and the real experiences of Indian people

and the tensions between fantasy and reality, symbolism and history,

ghosts and humanity. All too often, the tendency remains to talk about

Seattle’s Indian imagery and Seattle’s Indian people as though they have

2 0 0



little to do with each other. During the sesquicentennial, for example,

the vocal presence of the Duwamish Tribe was at times overshadowed

by Seattle’s symbolic Indians, especially in discussions of one of the

thorniest urban concerns of recent years: transportation. 

Seattle has some of the worst traffic in the nation, and efforts to build

mass transit systems have been hampered both by citizen-sponsored

tax revolts and by infighting among transit organizations. What is fas-

cinating about the transportation debates, however, is how often

metaphorical Indians have been part of them. The winner of a Seattle

Weekly poetry contest, for example, had Seeathl cursing Seattle with Tim

Eyman, the notorious spokesperson for several antitax initiatives:

Arrrrrgh! Nixoney chu-ga roalhop Eyman non-shaman Hooog in facto. We

Chinnok cho killa firebo an der baa baa Healtee err an errer!

(Arrrrrgh! Cursed, treaty-breaching fiends, may a smiling White Devil [Eyman]

eviscerate your roads, your emergency and health services, and your quality

of life and community for ever and ever!)

Meanwhile, Indian author Sherman Alexie penned a sarcastic column

in the city’s other alternative weekly, The Stranger, about the ancient

monorail of the Kickakickamish people, which had been destroyed along

with most of its builders by vengeful neighbors. “It was genocide,” Alexie

wrote, noting that the current monorail was still haunted by the ghosts

of the Kickakickamish, who would tear to pieces any expansion of the

space-age sky-train’s route. Then, for a story a few months later about

sports utility vehicles, the Weekly’s front cover showed the statue of Chief

Seattle sticking out of an electric car’s sunroof over the tagline, “What

Would Chief Seattle Drive?” Like other Indian images in Seattle’s past,

these stories were not really about Native people at all. That is exactly

the point: even today, Indians in Seattle are often more visible as

metaphors than as people. When, for example, an emcee quipped at

the Rotary’s sesquicentennial luncheon that “Native canoes are mov-

ing smoothly through the Black River S-Curves” in a mock nineteenth-

century traffic bulletin, he linked one of the Seattle area’s worst highway

T H E  R E T U R N I N G  H O S T S  /  2 0 1



interchanges with the empty riverbed nearby—as a joke. No wonder

James Rasmussen, whose Duwamish ancestors had once lived on the

Black River, had walked out.25

Debates over traffic and mass transit are closely related to the urban

malaise experienced by many Seattleites during the 1990s, when the

phenomenal wealth and growth of the dot-com boom seemed to

threaten the city’s identity. Among the most vocal of those concerned

was writer Fred Moody, who had spent years chronicling the high-tech

industry’s effects on the region. He lamented the loss of a more work-

ing-class, slower-paced Seattle, a place his intellectual forebear, the iras-

cible newspaperman Emmett Watson, had dubbed “Lesser Seattle” back

in the 1970s. Moody’s lament drew from the Native past:

The better the city’s material prospects, the worse its psychological pros-

pects. I sat up late one night and regarded the history of Seattle as a history

of diminishment, boom by boom. I remembered reading . . . how the tribes

finally were forcibly put on a boat and sent out into the sound. . . . Now I saw

their expulsion as equal parts exile and deliverance. They were our first lesser

Seattleites. Fully aware that a material boom would bring a spiritual bust to

their homeland, they served by their very existence to mock the pretensions

of newcomers intent on bringing civilization and wealth to the Northwest’s

paradise.

In Moody’s estimation, the Seattle of Microsoft, Starbucks, and Ama-

zon.com had gone overboard: “New-York-Pretty-Soon had grown into

More-Than-New-York-Right-Now,” he complained, continuing that

Seattleites like him and his downwardly mobile friends were “practi-

cally the next best thing to Native Americans.” Arguing that the

defining characteristic of a “lesser Seattleite”—and of lesser Seattle

itself—was the forswearing of ambition, Moody realized that the ques-

tion “What kind of city is Seattle becoming?” was also “What the hell

am I turning into?” The interesting thing was how crucial Indians were

to the answer.26

On the other side of the debate over Seattle’s soul, Robert Ferrigno,

a contributor to Microsoft’s online Slate magazine, pointed out that Seat-

2 0 2



tle’s problems in fact stemmed from the “sloth and poor economic poli-

cies of its other tenants: Indians, Scandinavians, and hippies.” The

indigenous tradition of the potlatch, Ferrigno claimed, had prevented

“research and development,” and the potlatch’s supposed values (“No

investments. No competition. No ego. No progress.”) had prevented

Northwest Indians and their slow-growth descendants from reaping the

rewards of urban achievement. A similar story about the so-called Seat-

tle Freeze, the idea that people in the city are superficially friendly but

distant and hard to get to know, meanwhile, referred back to Emmett

Watson’s tongue-in-cheek claim that “Seattle” was “Indian for ‘stay away

from here.’” According to these observers of local culture, both the best

and worst things about Seattle—its disappearing authenticity, on the

one hand, and its stubborn resistance to progress and chilly social cli-

mate, on the other—could be explained by telling stories about Indians.27

These place-stories from millennium’s end and new millennium’s

beginning, for all their postindustrial irony and anomie, sounded

remarkably like those told generations earlier. Aging pioneers were

replaced by aging lefties and upstart cheechakos shape-shifted into ven-

ture capitalists from California, but otherwise, the anxieties and conflicts

were the same: between native and newcomer, between competing

visions of urbanity, between the past and the future. Again, the debate

centered on what kind of place Seattle was and who belonged there,

and again, imagined Indians gave that debate its rhetorical heft. This

is perhaps the most powerful historical impulse in Seattle: to try to under-

stand the urban present through the Native past. Often, it is a noble

compulsion, inspired by the need to question economic avarice, envi-

ronmental degradation, or social disintegration. But only when it is

grounded—in the specifics of local history and in the context of present-

day Indian realities—does the impulse become something more than

blurry-eyed nostalgia or insensitive mockery. 

Occasionally, however, there are moments when Seattle’s Native pasts

have been connected in meaningful ways to its urban and Indian present.

Near the boundary between Seattle and its southern neighbor Tukwila

(“hazelnut” in Chinook Jargon), three hills guard the Duwamish River

and its valley. These were the hills that Dosie Wynn’s grandmother told

T H E  R E T U R N I N G  H O S T S  /  2 0 3



her about on trips to Seattle from the Muckleshoot Reservation back in

the 1930s, sharing stories of battles between North Wind and Storm

Wind and how the world came to be as it is. Members of the Duwamish

Tribe, for their part, understood the landscape around the hills as the

place where the world began. But urban history had not been kind to

the hills: one had been quarried down to less than half its original size,

another had been bisected by a freeway exit, and at the end of the twen-

tieth century, the third—known locally as Poverty Hill—was put up for

sale and was most likely going to be leveled. Then in 2000, a group of

neighbors contacted local tribes and began to organize on behalf of

Poverty Hill. In the end, the Friends of Duwamish Riverbend Hill raised

over a million dollars to purchase and preserve the site through the aus-

pices of the Cascade Land Conservancy. On the summer solstice in 2004,

the Friends’ coalition came together to celebrate the hill’s preservation

and unveiled plans for restoring the hill’s native ecosystems and for

building trails with signs interpreting the Duwamish Valley’s history.

Local and state officials, representatives of environmental organizations,

and, most notably, members of both the Muckleshoot and Duwamish

tribes (as well as Indian people from other places), all spoke of the impor-

tance of Poverty Hill: as a symbol of racial reconciliation and faith in

good government, as much-needed open space in an underserved indus-

trial neighborhood, and as tribal cultural patrimony. At Poverty Hill,

ecotopian impulses for restoration, preservation, and the ever-elusive

“sense of place” intersected with tribal interests in protecting sacred

sites and traditional cultural properties. The key was that the parties

involved moved beyond the metaphors. Indian people at Poverty Hill

were not just symbols of an endangered landscape but active partners

in, and beneficiaries of, its preservation.28

But the desire to protect and restore urban nature using the Native

past can also make for bad history. Not far away from Poverty Hill, for

instance, more than a thousand tons of contaminated soil has been

removed to create a new estuarine refuge for salmon on the polluted

and channelized Duwamish River. Named Herring’s House Park after

the indigenous town razed in 1893, the site aims to link restoration to

local history. The problem, however, is that the park is in the wrong

2 0 4



place: it is not on the site of Herring’s House, which is downstream; it

is on the site of Basketry Hat. Herring’s House was a more “ecologi-

cal” name, though, and so marketing trumped history. Meanwhile, iron-

ically, native-plant restoration on the site obliterated some of the last

visible evidence of Seattle’s indigenous geography: broken shells that

were part of Basketry Hat’s middens. In this case, restoring (and

repackaging) the landscape for ecotopian Seattle has only further mud-

dled this place’s history. Meanwhile, across the street, a large sign pro-

claims that someday, if the funding (far less than the cost of restoring

the park) can ever be found, the Duwamish Tribe will have a longhouse

here again.29

In repairing Seattle’s landscape, restorationists were also re-storying

that landscape. Like city leaders warning of Indian-borne apocalypse

in Seattle Illahee of the 1870s, Tilikums using totem poles to sell the

city in the 1910s, and pioneer descendants playing Indian to lament

urban growth in the 1930s, restorationists were using the Native past

to understand, and in some ways to mitigate, the urban present. But

restoration of indigenous places is deeply problematic: there is no guar-

antee that the salmon or anything else can be brought back or that such

efforts will actually improve the material conditions of modern Indian

lives. The question remains, then: good intentions aside, whom do these

place-stories of “restoration” truly benefit? To when, and to whom, is what

being restored, exactly?

O
bservers of u.s. history have often written that one

of the central American cultural projects has been to find

a way to belong here on this continent, to craft an iden-

tity from Old World origins and New World circumstances.

Very often, that project has involved using Indian imagery to tell Amer-

ican stories: Boston Tea Party activists dressed as Indians, James Fen-

imore Cooper’s Leatherstocking Tales, the YMCA’s Indian Guides, Chief

Seattle’s fifth Gospel. But this need to become Native in order to be Amer-

ican runs counter to the real history of our nation’s engagements with

indigenous societies. For every buckskin-clad frontier hero of Amer-

ican folklore, there was a Sand Creek or Trail of Tears; for every liter-

T H E  R E T U R N I N G  H O S T S  /  2 0 5



ary Noble Savage, there was a smallpox blanket or a boarding school;

for every New Age eco-shaman there was a missionary’s insult or a game

warden’s handcuffs. If the chief American cultural project has been to

bury Indian facts under American fictions, then perhaps the new project

in Seattle’s case, means moving beyond the recycled place-stories—

beyond the seeming inability of Indian and urban histories to coexist—

and understanding the work our stories have done in this place: what

they have ignored, what they have allowed, whom they have benefited.

One way to begin is through knowing, and sharing, the history that

has woven lives together in the city and its hinterland, and imagining

what might have been different. In Facing East from Indian Country, his

provocative account of early American history from the vantage point

of the continent’s indigenous peoples, historian Daniel Richter has argued

that the chaos and violence of that history were never inevitable. Indi-

ans and whites had to learn to hate each other. This is also true on Puget

Sound, where the future was never preordained and where the idea that

Indian history and urban history were somehow separate had to be cre-

ated in town ordinances and racial theories, transmitted through pio-

neer memoirs and Potlatch parades, and literally built into the

environment through ship canals and historic districts. Comprehend-

ing Native pasts entails connecting urban and Indian histories and

understanding the processes through which indigenous places have been

dispossessed, expropriated, and transformed. It means knowing the his-

tory of the indigenous peoples on whose homelands Seattle was built,

the Shilsholes and Lakes and Duwamish and Suquamish and Muck-

leshoots, as well as the history of the Native peoples and territories who

have been drawn into the city’s urban orbit, the S’Klallams and Tlin-

gits and Coeur d’Alenes and Aleuts and Blackfeet. Unearthing Seattle’s

Native pasts requires us also to look critically at which stories we tell

about our shared past and why we tell them. Lastly, it demands that we

see the ways in which Native people have actively contributed to,

shaped, or resisted those stories.30

Stories matter. Throughout Seattle’s history, actions have sprung out

of stories, just as actions—tidelands filled, basket weavers paid, “bow

and arrow joints” shut down—have in turn resulted in new narratives

2 0 6



about this place and who belongs here. At the beginning of the twenty-

first century, Seattle’s urban palimpsest surely has room for new sto-

ries. It is possible, as some of the elders once said, that the horned

serpents are gone, banished by “too many houses” and too much change.

There are so many moments where Seattle’s history might have gone

in other directions: a longhouse unburned, a mortuary pole left where

it stood, a lake not lowered. We may look back, but we cannot go back.

The past will not be undone. “For better or worse, this native history

belongs to us all,” Daniel Richter writes, continuing by saying that under-

standing that past might allow us to “find ways to focus more produc-

tively on our future.”31

Perhaps in the revival of indigenous place-names and in powwows

at Daybreak Star, in the growing respect for the treaties and in every

college diploma earned by an Indian, in the restoration of urban nature

and in the willingness to challenge narratives of progress, there is hope

that Seattle’s Native past—or, more accurately, its many Native pasts—

can be unearthed. These place-stories, linked to urban and Indian

presents and futures, will not simply be cautionary tales, smug jokes,

or nostalgic fantasies but will be dialogues about the transformations

of landscape and power in the city and about strategies for living together

humanely in this place. Bringing new stories to light and considering

how those stories can inform new kinds of action should be our agenda

for the future, and it is crafted in the moments when we simply ask

each other, What happened here?

T H E  R E T U R N I N G  H O S T S  /  2 0 7




























An Atlas of Indigenous Seattle

Coll Thrush and Nile Thompson

Maps by Amir Sheikh

Historical Introduction, by Coll Thrush

answering the question What happened here? requires asking

another: What was here before? In Seattle, as in most cities, the pre-urban

landscape has been transformed almost beyond recognition. Tracing

the course of the Duwamish River as it was in 1851, for example, can

be a daunting task. Understanding the ways in which indigenous people

inhabited that landscape, meanwhile, can be even more difficult. In

short, there is virtually nothing left to see—earlier generations of Seat-

tleites made sure of that—and so comprehending the city’s indigenous

geography involves peeling back decades of development and imag-

ining the possibilities. Even then, the risk remains that we will imag-

ine only what we expected to see all along—noble savages, empty

wilderness, totem poles—rather than what might have actually once been

there. Seattle’s Native pasts have been full of such imaginings. Luckily,

through the work of two men and the Indian people who collaborated

with them, we have a rare opportunity to envision in specific, concrete

ways the places that would eventually become Seattle. In the 1910s, both

men collected information about traditional indigenous geographies of

the Seattle area, working both with Duwamish men and women living

in and around the city and with Muckleshoot and Suquamish inform-

ants from area reservations.

The first of these researchers was Thomas Talbot Waterman

(1885–1936). A student of Franz Boas, Waterman taught anthropology

and sociology at the University of Washington in the early twentieth

century. Although he lived in Seattle for only a handful of years, the

city held a special fascination for him. “The actual topography is very

2 0 9



interesting,” he noted, “and the spot is doubly interesting because of

the great city which has grown up there.” Even better, though, the urban

landscape that had grown up on central Puget Sound was still popu-

lated by Indian people. Some of them, like Seetoowathl in his float house,

shared their knowledge with him from within the city limits. Others,

like Jennie Davis and Amelia Sneatlum from Suquamish and Betsy

Whatcom from Muckleshoot, educated him in their reservation homes.

The resulting manuscript, entitled “Puget Sound Geography,” includes

the names of hundreds of places, from the Cascade Mountains in the

east to the western shores of Puget Sound and from Whidbey Island

in the north to the many-armed southern reach of the Sound. The names

speak about the everyday practices of life here: places where fish were

caught, places where canoes could be portaged, places where games

were played. They tell of the landscape’s intellectual elements: the con-

nections between bodies, houses, and the earth; ways of measuring the

land and moving on the waters; spirit forces that gave life meaning.

Most importantly, they are proof of the profound “inhabitedness” of

this first country: the towns, the trails, the stories from deep time.1

Waterman’s work did have its problems. He often misunderstood

the elders and sometimes failed to obtain the meanings of the place-

names he was offered, and his maps are consistently bad. His great-

est error, though, was in the attitude he brought to his research. Noting,

for example, that indigenous people on Puget Sound might have twenty

names for places along a river but no name for the river as a whole,

Waterman commented that “from our own standpoint, the Indian’s

conception of the size of the world is startlingly inadequate.” Water-

man saw indigenous people as his intellectual inferiors, inhabiting

a lower rung on the ladder between Savagery and Civilization. To

strengthen this point, Waterman compared, for example, place-naming

practices among the peoples of the Pacific: some Polynesian societies

had names only for small places, while others, like the Samoans, had

achieved a “national and archipelagic designation.” It was clear which

societies Waterman found to be more civilized. While his work is a

testament to the richness of indigenous inhabitance in Seattle and

Puget Sound, it is also an example of the kind of thinking that placed

2 1 0



Indians in the category of “primitive”—and that justified their

dispossession.2

For all its biases, the biggest problem with “Puget Sound Geogra-

phy” has been its inaccessibility. Available for decades only in the Ban-

croft Library, Berkeley, a photocopy of the unfinished manuscript was

obtained by the University of Washington in the 1980s. Despite its poor

quality, outdated and inconsistent orthography, and chaotic strike-

throughs and marginalia, the University of Washington copy has been

a boon both to archaeologists and to historians but has remained inac-

cessible and unusable to all but the most intrepid or formally educated

researchers. In the 1990s, Upper Skagit tribal member Vi Hilbert,

anthropologist Jay Miller, and amateur linguist Zalmai Zahir edited the

manuscript, putting the elders’ words into modern orthography, trans-

lating a number of place-names that Waterman had not, and, most

importantly, linking the work to present-day efforts to reawaken the

indigenous language of the region. Even though their edition was pub-

lished in 2001, the information remained relatively inaccessible because

the limited printing run of this latest incarnation of Waterman’s

research meant that it was expensive and difficult to find. The present

atlas builds on the work of Hilbert and her colleagues but also returns

to the original Waterman manuscript in an effort to expand the num-

ber of translations and to correct past mistranslations.

In addition to the material gathered by Waterman, this atlas makes

use of certain field notes of John Peabody Harrington (1884–1961). Heav-

ily influenced while at Stanford University by the work of the renowned

anthropologist A. L. Kroeber, Harrington began graduate studies in

Germany but soon dropped out to become a high school teacher in

California, using his summers off to conduct fieldwork. In 1910, he

came to Seattle to teach summer courses in linguistics and Northwest

Coast ethnology at the University of Washington, as well as to conduct

a series of public lectures entitled “The Siberian Origin of the Ameri-

can Indian.” During the summer of 1910, he conducted fieldwork with

Duwamish people, including hereditary Duwamish chief William

Rogers, on the Suquamish Reservation. Rogers, an Indian man named

Moore, and the informant and interpreter Edward Percival joined Har-

A N  AT L A S  O F  I N D I G E N O U S  S E AT T L E  /  2 1 1



rington on visits to the Seattle and Renton area, contributing the place-

names included in this atlas. This research, along with his more exten-

sive work on the last speakers of several California languages, brought

Harrington to the attention of the Bureau of American Ethnology, which

hired him as an ethnographer in 1915. 

Over the next four decades, Harrington went on to collect materials

on more than a hundred additional indigenous languages of North

America and became a pioneer of linguistic recordings. Reclusive and

eccentric, Harrington received little academic recognition during his

life, but after his death, his colleagues discovered enormous amounts

of field notes, squirreled away in garages and storage units up and down

the West Coast. These field notes have supplied subsequent generations

of scholars with remarkable insights into languages and cultural prac-

tices that are now lost. (Also, unlike Waterman, Harrington rarely made

explicit written judgments about Native societies but appears to have

had a deep appreciation for the sophistication of Indian languages, tech-

nologies, and cultures.)3

Except where noted, the information in this atlas comes from the

original Waterman and Harrington materials, the field notes and plat

maps of the General Land Office’s cadastral survey conducted in the

1850s, a list of villages and longhouses that was an exhibit in a 1920s

land claims case, and Erna Gunther’s classic Ethnobotany of Western

Washington. Unless noted otherwise, archaeological data come from the

database held and maintained by the University of Washington’s Burke

Museum of Natural History and Culture. In many cases, additional

information about the history of specific sites can be found within the

main text of the book.4 We have chosen somewhat arbitrarily to limit

the scope of the atlas to Seattle’s current boundaries, with a handful of

exceptions in which a site immediately outside the city limits was impor-

tant to understanding places within Seattle (e.g., entries 82–89) or where

a site spoke directly to the broader themes of this book (e.g., entry 127).

The concerns of present-day tribal peoples dictate how this atlas

should be used. Despite the tumult of regrades and ship canals, arti-

facts of Seattle’s indigenous past surely remain undisturbed through-

out the city. With that in mind, the maps have been created at a scale

2 1 2



that prevents the specific location of individual sites. We have also with-

held mention of ancestral burial sites or of indigenous remains that

have been found in the city. But should a reader inadvertently unearth

something (or someone) while digging a basement or clearing brush,

a call to the tribes or to the Burke Museum should be the first response—

not just because it is the right thing to do but because it is in keeping

with any number of state and federal laws. Finally, although many eld-

ers once said that sacred sites in Seattle had lost their power due to urban

development, some are being used again today and should be treated

with respect. Just as this is not a pot hunter’s or grave robber’s guide

to Seattle, it is also not a primer for playing Indian in the city.

Maps are risky things. Publishing this information lays bare tradi-

tional knowledge, and in doing so, risks intrusion upon the intellectual

and cultural rights of modern tribal people. But there is also another

kind of risk: getting the history wrong. The tighter the geographical

focus, the less clear the information tends to be; the result is an atlas

that includes conjecture, speculation, and goings-out on various limbs

in the interest of imagining the possibilities. Of course, the simple fact

that in many cases this geography is speculative—the untranslatable

words, the mysterious meanings, the unclear uses of places—is a result

of the history described in this book; it is part of the historical silence

created by epidemics, dispossession, and forced assimilation.

Waterman himself fretted about how much had already been lost

when he was collecting the place-names nearly a century ago: “On Puget

Sound alone, there seem to have been in the neighborhood of ten thou-

sand proper names. I have secured about half this number, the remain-

der having passed out of memory. I am continually warned by Indians

that they give me for my maps only a small part of the total number

which once was used. The rest they have either forgotten or never heard.

‘The old people could have told you all’ is the remark most commonly

heard.”5 The math is off—Waterman and his students collected less than

10 percent of the names he claimed must have existed—but the point

stands. So much was lost prior to the 1910s that we are bereft: the view

offered by Waterman’s informants looks out on only a tiny fraction of

the richness that was once here. Considering the power of what we do

A N  AT L A S  O F  I N D I G E N O U S  S E AT T L E  /  2 1 3



have, the reality must have been staggering. Instead of just over ten

dozen names for Seattle, we might have had a thousand if only history

had worked out differently. That said, the maps that follow are not

intended as a complete or comprehensive survey of Seattle’s indigenous

geography; rather, they are mere glimpses of what was here before.

The final risk of maps such as these is that they might give the impres-

sion that such geographies were static and unchanging. This was

surely not the case, especially in a geologically, ecologically, and culturally

dynamic place such as Puget Sound. Even before the arrival of the Denny

Party and others, the indigenous maps of this place surely changed over

time as sites and their uses changed. Instead of a stable “zero datum”

on which the rest of Seattle’s history takes place, it is perhaps more accu-

rate to think of this atlas as merely a partial snapshot of the indigenous

world just prior to white settlement. It is also useful to consider the

other maps that could be made to represent Seattle’s diverse Native pasts:

the locations of mixed-race and Indian families in Seattle’s neighbor-

hoods, the installations of totem poles in the city, and the geographies

of Skid Road. Each of these landscapes could—and perhaps should—

be mapped as well and interleaved with the maps presented here for

an even fuller accounting of the erasures, ironies, and persistences that

make up the palimpsest that is Seattle’s history. I hope these maps are

a step in that direction. 

Linguistic Introduction, by Nile Thompson

How a given community defines its landscape through place-names

has long held a fascination for many anthropologists. The vocabulary

used as such is viewed as a window for understanding how a given soci-

ety defines its place in the world. Certainly, traditional names have more

appeal than today’s urban nomenclature such as “the Seattle Center”

or “Sixty-third Street.” 

The place-names of the Puget Sound Salish peoples have a wide range

of reference, from myth to human activity, from spirit power to animal

species, and from natural resource to natural landmark. A site could

2 1 4



be named in isolation or it could be contrasted with other like features.

The place-names themselves can refer to broad expanses or areas or to

specific sandspits or rocks. Along the coastline, places were generally

named from the perspective of looking toward the shore from Puget

Sound. 

The following Whulshootseed place-names are written in a practi-

cal alphabet designed to be part of a writing system for use by speak-

ers of English.6 A number of the sounds of Whulshootseed are found

in English and are written the same, for example, b, d, g, h, j, l, p, s, t,

w, and y. Other sounds are specific to certain usages in English or are

combination letters, composed of two parts like their counterparts in

English. 

a as in ‘ma’ when stressed (i.e., á); often as in ‘cedar’ when

unstressed (i.e., a)

cH as in ‘chew’

dZ as in ‘rods’

ee usually as in ‘meet’ but it can shift to being like the vowel in ‘day’

when next to a back consonant (q, qW, XW, or 7)

gW as in ‘Gwen’

k the front k of English in ‘keep’

kW as in ‘queen’

oo usually as in ‘shoot’ but it can shift to being like the vowel in ‘hoe’

when next to a back consonant

q the back k of English in ‘cool’

qW as in ‘quote’

sH as in ‘ship’

tS as in ‘cats’

u as in ‘hut’

7 as in the middle of ‘uh oh’

In addition to not using the Czech and Greek letters found in techni-

cal linguistic alphabets, this practical alphabet makes use of capitalization

rather than apostrophes to show glottalization. Most glottalized sounds

(B, CH, D, K, KW, L, P, Q, QW, TS, W, and Y ) are the same as their

A N  AT L A S  O F  I N D I G E N O U S  S E AT T L E  /  2 1 5



nonglottalized counterparts except that they are pronounced with an

explosion of pressure built up at the back of the mouth. A few of the

remaining sounds require a bit more explanation:

hL a breathy l produced by blowing air along the area the tongue tip 

is touching 

TL like the tl in ‘Atlantic’ if the initial vowel alone makes the first sylla-

ble; an explosion of air pressure (i.e., glottalization) accompanies

the start of the next syllable

X a raspy sound made by raising the back of the tongue and rushing

air around where it meets the roof of the mouth (as found in some

German dialects for ch)

The s- prefix in a number of place-names (e.g., 16, 19, 20, 22, and

23) merely signifies that the word is a noun. Other prefixes are used

when the same root is used in a verb. The symbols sH and sh distin-

guish between a single sound and the s- prefix preceding a root that

begins with an h (in which case it is two distinct sounds). 

While word roots in the Whulshootseed language usually have dis-

tinct meanings, certain suffixes by their very nature are ambiguous.

These are called lexical suffixes because they contain meaning rather

than refer to a grammatical relationship. They can also influence the

meaning of the accompanying root. The following table of lexical suffixes

that appear in Seattle place-names shows that a number of these

suffixes can differ in meaning depending on whether they are used in

an anatomical, geographic, shape/role, or object reference, any of which

is possible in place-names. This list is preliminary and is not intended

to be exhaustive; it is interesting, for example, that no Seattle place-name

is formed with the suffix -adacH ‘beach’. Some of the lexical suffixes are

clearly compounds, formed by combining two of them. 

The suffix -ap requires some explanation because most English speak-

ers might be inclined to view it as referring to ‘head’ rather than ‘bottom’.

In regard to a river, -ap refers to the lower end where it drains out. But

in terms of an inlet, the suffix refers to the end farthest from the mouth. 

There are a number of other reoccurring morphemes (or word parts)

2 1 6



* Other related suffixes meaning ‘water’  include -alqoo, -ahLqoo, and -ayqW.

Anatomical Geographic Shape/role Object

-abatS ‘body’ ‘cylindrical object’ ‘tree trunk’

-absH ‘people’

-acHee ‘hand’ ‘branch’ 

-adee ‘ear’ ‘thing attached ‘sound’, ‘noise’

to the side’ 

-ahL ‘little object’ ‘baby’

-alee ‘place’

-altxW ‘house’

-ap ‘rear end’, ‘tail’ ‘bottom end ‘thing at base’

of inlet’ 

-apsub ‘neck’, ‘throat’ ‘isthmus’

-aqs ‘nose’ ‘spit’, ‘point ‘pointed object’

of land’

-aqW* ‘water’ ‘liquid object’

-as ‘flats’

-atS ‘tree’, ‘bush’, ‘plant,’

‘stick’

-aXad ‘shoulder’ ‘thing on side or edge’

-axW ‘covering’

-ay ‘plant’, ‘bush’, 

‘tree’, ‘being’

-ayas ‘eye’ ‘soft, round object’

-beexW ‘ground’, ‘land’ ‘people’

-cHoo ‘water’

-eecH ‘spine’ ‘ridge’ ‘ridged object’ ‘covering’

-eedgWas ‘torso’, ‘chest’

-eels ‘rock’ ‘hard and round ‘coin’

object’

-gWas ‘rib’, ‘waist’ ‘thing in middle’

-oolcH ‘abdomen’ ‘fillable object’ ‘basket’, ‘barrel’

-oos ‘face’ ‘bluff ’ ‘flat object’

-ootSeed ‘mouth’ ‘mouth of waterway’ ‘opening’ ‘language’

-qeed ‘head’ ‘summit’ ‘thing on top’

-sHud ‘foot,’ ‘lower leg’ ‘supporting object’

-weehL ‘conveying object’ ‘canoe’

-7was ‘ribs’ ‘object across’



in these place-names. For example, the compound prefix b-as- (in entries

40 and 102) means ‘it has’ and indicates that the site contains or is home

to the creature or object presented in the remainder of the word. Addi-

tionally, the prefix dxW- (pronounced similar to the tw in ‘twilight’)

means ‘place’.

Although both the Waterman and Harrington listings are problem-

atic, with the glosses of some words not matching the transcriptions, the

Coast Salishan reference books available today allow further refinement

of their combined list.7 Many times (e.g., 36 and 43) what appear to be

remarks of their knowledgeable informants turn out to actually be accu-

rate translations of otherwise-problematic place-names. Thus, some

of the riddles of previous versions have fallen by the wayside. One

humorous error in Harrington that has been perpetuated until now is

the listing of the name for Ballard as Hát Hat. Here Harrington and

his informant miscommunicated because the Puget Sound Salish lan-

guage is one of the few in the world that lack nasal consonants in reg-

ular speech. The word given, XátXat, actually means the duck ‘mallard’

rather than the place-name ‘Ballard’.8

2 1 8



NORTHEAST
(page 249)

NORTHWEST
(page 220)

SOUTHWEST
(page 231)

SOUTHEAST
(page 245)



Map 1: Northwest

The four European compass points were not necessarily the most impor-

tant directions in Puget Sound indigenous life. While indigenous

people recognized east and west as the places the sun rose and set, and

north and south as places that sent different kinds of weather, orien-

tations such as landward, seaward, downriver, and upriver were just as

important, if not more so.9 Similarly, early settlers on Puget Sound had

a sense of direction quite different from that of modern residents. Like

indigenous people, the first generation of settlers experienced this region

from the water, and so, for them, traveling south to Olympia meant going

up the Sound, while returning to the north meant going down-Sound.

Imagine, then, that we are on a landward journey up the Sound, visit-

ing first the territory of the Shilshole people and then moving into the

outlying lands and waters of the Duwamish proper.

1 Salt Water XWulcH

Theodore Winthrop’s 1862 travel narrative The Canoe and the Saddle used

the anglicized form of this word to denote both “Indian Whulgeamish

and Yankee Whulgers” who lived along the Sound (correctly using the

Whulshootseed change of cH to j before vowel-initial suffixes). In the

century and a half since, this word for Puget Sound, spelled in various

ways, has occasionally resurfaced, most notably in the well-known series

of guidebooks profiling hikes and other excursions around the Sound

published by The Mountaineers.10

2 Blackcaps on the Sides cHálqWadee

This place-name refers to the blackcap (Rubus leucodermis), a native fruit

whose berries and shoots were harvested around the shores of this small

lake. Now known as Bitter Lake, Blackcaps on the Sides was also a refuge

for the Shilshole people during raids by northern slavers.

3 Calmed Down a Little seesáhLtub

Haller Lake’s original name likely refers to its role as another refuge dur-

ing slave raids. Projectile points have been found nearby, suggesting that

2 2 0



the lake was also a hunting site. Trails likely connected Calmed Down 

a Little to other upland sites like 110 and 123 below.

4 Sharp Rocks XWééXWutSeels

Like many Whulshootseed place-names, this name for the sharp bluffs

just south of Spring Beach is straightforward and descriptive, aiding

travelers on the Sound in identifying the landmark. Like many other

rocks along the coastline, these may have been blasted away.

A N  AT L A S  O F  I N D I G E N O U S  S E AT T L E  /  2 2 1

30

29

28

27

26
25

7
9

10

11
12

14

15

16

17 18

19

20

21

13

22

23

6

5

4

1 2

3

NORTHWEST

110

07

108

8

24

31

32

33

34 35

36
37

38

231

091

1

061
051



5 Dropped Down qWátub

Piper’s Creek runs through a deep canyon here in an otherwise gently

sloping landscape, which may explain the name. Once the site of large

salmon runs, the creek has been restored after decades of neglect.

6 Canoe Qéélbeed

Most likely, Meadow Point (today’s Golden Gardens Park) was used as a

storage area for saltwater canoes since at low tide there was not enough

water for the people of the nearby Shilshole (today’s Salmon Bay) to

have access to or from their village.11

7 Lying Curled Up CHútqeedud (lit. ‘tip brought up to the head’) 

Waterman’s informant described this small sandspit at the site of the

Shilshole Marina as “lying curled like a pillow” and noted that it was

well known as a place for gathering fine clams.

8 Hanging on the Shoulder KeehLalabud 

Like many of the place-names around Seattle and throughout Puget

Sound, this one, for the knoll at the north end of the railroad crossing 

of Salmon Bay, uses language of the body to describe the land. 

9 Mouth of Shilshole sHulsHóólootSeed

The narrow mouth of Salmon Bay takes its name from the indigenous

community at entry 10. One of Waterman’s informants described the

passage through here as “like shoving a thread through a bead.” This

statement probably reflects the lack of navigable water; longtime Bal-

lard families report that prior to the building of the locks, one could

wade through the water at the mouth of Salmon Bay at low tide.12

10 Tucked Away Inside sHulsHóól

This large village was the home of the Shilshoolabsh, or Shilshole people,

who had two large longhouses here, each 60 by 120 feet, and an even

greater “potlatch house.” Devastating raids by North Coast tribes in the

early nineteenth century may explain both the name (which Harrington

described as “going way inland”) and the village’s location inside Salmon

2 2 2



Bay. Despite settlement by non-Indians, some Shilshole people remained

here until the construction of the Hiram M. Chittenden Locks in the

early twentieth century, while others became part of the community 

of Ballard or moved to area reservations. Relatively little is known about

this settlement, as construction of the locks destroyed most of it in the

1910s. In the 1920s, however, archaeologist A. G. Colley conducted an

excavation of the western part of the site, where the wakes of canal-

bound boats had been wearing away several feet of shoreline every year.

He found tools made of antler, stone, bone, and even iron.

11 Spirit Canoe Power butudáqt

The power that resided in this creek allowed indigenous doctors to

reach the world of the dead to recover the souls of ailing or troubled

people. Doctor Jim, who hung himself on Salmon Bay in 1880, likely

was connected with the creek, which by then had been befouled by 

cattle belonging to Ballard’s farmers.

12 Serviceberry QWulástab

Waterman’s “small bush with white flowers and black berries” is a clear

reference to serviceberry (Amelanchier alnifolia), whose wood was used

for gaming pieces and whose berries were eaten either fresh or dried.

13 Outlet gWáXWap (lit. ‘leak [at] bottom end’)

This was the outlet of a stream, known to settlers as Ross Creek, that

emptied Lake Union into Salmon Bay and was the passageway of sev-

eral runs of salmon (chum, pink, chinook, and coho). 

14 Small Lake XáXu7cHoo (lit. ‘small great-amount-of-water’) This is

the diminutive form of the word used to denote Lake Washington (see

entry 90), in keeping with the lakes’ relative sizes.

A N  AT L A S  O F  I N D I G E N O U S  S E AT T L E  /  2 2 3



15 Thrashed Water sCHaxW7álqoo

or

Covered Water scHooxW7álqoo

People drove fish into this narrow, brushy stream by thrashing the water

with sticks. The stream now flows in a pipe somewhere under the streets

of the Fremont neighborhood.

16 Extended from the Ridge sTácHeecH

Now the site of Gas Works Park, this point was described by Water-

man’s informants as leaning against the slope of the Wallingford neigh-

borhood like a prop used to hold up part of a house.

17 Prairie báqWab

This was one of several small prairies maintained in what is now Seat-

tle; as such, it was likely an important site for cultivating and gathering

roots and other foods that indigenous people propagated through burn-

ing and transplanting. The right to dig and burn on prairies typically

passed down through women; the rights to this prairie likely belonged

to women from entry 10 above and/or entry 108 below. Ancient tools

made from obsidian have been found here; the raw material for the

tools likely came from central Washington or perhaps as far away as

central Oregon.

18 Croaking waQééQab (lit. ‘doing like a frog’)

Perhaps this small creek on the north side of Portage Bay was known

for its amphibious inhabitants, or perhaps it burbled in a way that

reminded local people of frogs. The site might also have had religious

significance; Frog was a minor spirit power that helped even the most

common folk sing during winter ceremonies. A man named Dzak-

woos, or “Indian Jim Zackuse,” whose descendants include many

members of the modern Snoqualmie Tribe, had a homestead here 

until the 1880s.13

2 2 4



19 Lowered Promontory sKWíTSaqs

The “top” of Lake Union seems an odd place for a “low” name, but the

word for this place most likely refers to the point’s relationship to the

surrounding, and much higher, landscape. Long before white settlers

envisioned a canal linking Lake Washington and Lake Union, indige-

nous people used this corridor to travel between the backcountry and

the Sound. 

20 Marsh spáhLaXad

The wetlands on the south shore of Portage Bay must have been 

a fine place for hunting waterfowl. Chesheeahud, or “Lake Union 

John,” owned several acres here from at least 1880 until 1906, a fact

commemorated in a “pocket park” at the foot of Shelby Street by a

plaque and depictions of salmon by an artist of the Puyallup Tribe.

21 Jumping over Driftwood saxWabábatS (lit. ‘jump over tree trunk’)

The Lake Union shoreline was thick with logs here. A similar place-

name, Jumping Down (saxWsaxWáp), was used for a Suquamish gam-

ing site on Sinclair Inlet across Puget Sound; that name refers to a

contest in which participants vied to see who could jump the farthest

off a five-foot-high rock.14

22 Deep sTLup

This is a typically no-nonsense description of the place where the steep

slope of Capitol Hill descends into the waters of Lake Union.

23 Trail to the Beach scHákWsHud (lit. ‘the foot end of the beach’)

A trail from Little (or Large) Prairie (entry 33) ended here. An elderly

indigenous man named Tsetseguis, a close acquaintance of the David

Denny family, lived here with his family in Seattle’s early years, when

the south end of Lake Union was dominated by Denny’s sawmill.15

24 Deep for Canoes TLupéél7weehL

Although this name is similar to Deep (entry 22), the difference mat-

ters. Such distinctions were critical to correct navigation and the shar-

A N  AT L A S  O F  I N D I G E N O U S  S E AT T L E  /  2 2 5



ing of information. According to the maps created by the General Land

Office in the 1850s, there was a trail near here that skirted the southern

slope of Queen Anne Hill on its way to Elliott Bay.

25 Lots of Water heewáyqW

This creek in the Lawtonwood neighborhood, now known as Kiwanis

Creek and the site of a large heron rookery, was a reliable source of

freshwater in all seasons. 

26 Brush Spread on the Water paQátSahLcHoo

Excavations for the West Point sewage treatment plant in the 1990s

uncovered a history of settlement here that stretched back more than

four millennia. Even as landslides, earthquakes, and rising sea levels

transformed the point, indigenous people continued to use it to process

fish and shellfish. Of particular importance are the trade items found

here: petrified wood from the Columbia River, obsidian from the arid

interior, and carved stone jewelry from British Columbia, all attesting

to far-reaching networks of commerce. Although this deep-time settle-

ment seems to have been forgotten by Waterman’s twentieth-century

informants, during the nineteenth century the site served as home to

dispossessed Duwamish Indians. Waterman was told that the name

described the act of pushing or thrusting one’s way through brush, or

the opening of leaf buds—apt similes for the way the point emerges

from the thickly wooded bluffs that overhang it.16

27 Spring bóólatS 

Harrington collected this name for waters that emerged from the Mag-

nolia Bluffs. Springs like these, arising where water sinks through sand

and soil and then reaches nearly impermeable clay, help lubricate the

landslides that have destroyed a number of homes near here. 

28 Cold Creek TLóóXWahLqoo (lit. ‘cold freshwater’) 

This is a small creek flowing off the Magnolia Bluffs that may have

been a reliable source of freshwater for travelers on the Sound. There

is some disagreement between Waterman and Harrington regarding

2 2 6



this site and that of entry 30 below; Waterman seems to have confused

meanings and words, transposing this name to the other site but giving

it that site’s meaning. Such discrepancies attest to the imperfect nature

of the process by which the two ethnographers gathered their data. 

29 Covered by Covering léépleepahLaxW

and

Rock CHúTLa

Now known as Four Mile Rock, this massive glacial erratic sits at the

foot of Magnolia Bluffs. The meaning of one of its names appears to

refer to a story about the boulder. According to oral tradition, a hero

named Stakoob once took a huge net woven of cedar and hazel and

cast it over this rock from the far side of the Sound. The other name is

purely descriptive, like the use of the word for ‘spring’ for various sites. 

30 River Otter Creek QaTLáhLqoo

The intermittent stream in today’s Magnolia Park was probably once

inhabited by Lutra canadensis; it now is mostly covered by a road

descending into the park.

31 Mouth along the Side seeláqWootSeed

When Dr. Henry A. Smith, the man who would eventually pen the first

written version of Seeathl’s famous speech, moved here in the 1850s,

several indigenous families still lived in this place. The slopes above the

salt marshes between Smith Cove and Salmon Bay were refuges during

slave raids, but a large shell midden excavated nearby in 1913 suggests

their importance during times of peace and prosperity as well.

32 Aerial Duck Net túqap (lit. ‘blocked at bottom’)

This is a common place-name in Puget Sound, referring to nets that

were strung between tall poles and used to catch waterfowl. This

unique technology mystified British explorer George Vancouver, who

wrote that it was “undoubtedly, intended to answer some particular

purpose; but whether of a religious, civil, or military nature, must be

left to some future investigation.”17 Waterman was told that the ducks

A N  AT L A S  O F  I N D I G E N O U S  S E AT T L E  /  2 2 7



would be “started up” at Lake Union, then caught in the net here. One

of Harrington’s informants, Percival, had camped here regularly before

the site was urbanized and recalled that a small creek ran year-round at

the site. This place-name can also describe someone who is constipated.

33 Little Prairie babáqWab

or

Large Prairie báqWbaqWab

Indian witnesses in a land claims case in the 1920s identified this 

place as the site of two longhouses, each 48 by 96 feet. The residents 

of these houses would have made good use of the large patches of salal

(Gaultheria shallon) that could be found here, either eating the fruit

fresh or drying it into cakes for the winter. Middens found along the

shoreline here attest to the area’s importance as a shellfish-processing

site as well. Settler William Bell staked his claim here, and until the

early twentieth century, the Belltown shoreline was an important

camping place for Native people, including migrants from Alaska,

British Columbia, and Washington’s outer coast.

34 Sour Water scHapaqW

Harrington collected this name for a hole in the sand that could be seen

at low tide, about two blocks north of the foot of Pike Street. His inform-

ants told him that the hole was believed to connect via an underground

channel to Lake Union. Young whales were said to have swum through

the tunnel to the lake. A similar story is told about entry 116, and in

fact, stories of such subterranean waterways abound throughout the

region.18

35 Spring bóólatS

This spring, located on what would become Arthur Denny’s homestead,

was likely a less important source of freshwater for indigenous people,

since it had the same unadorned designation as entry 27. Had it been

more significant, it likely would have had a name like those for 58 and

2 2 8



99. This spring and others inspired the names of Spring Street and 

the Spring Hill Water Company, Seattle’s first municipal water supply,

which was organized in 1881.19

36 Grounds of the Leader’s Camp QulXáqabeexW

This place-name is said by Harrington to be the ‘chief place’ and another

name for ‘Seattle’. Most likely this was the name for a camp of a man

known as either Kelly or Seattle Curley (Soowalt), who was the head-

man of the Duwamish village in what is now downtown Seattle. He

was a brother of Seeathl. His camp was located between Columbia and

Cherry streets and First and Second avenues by one source but closer to

Seneca or Spring by others. This camp also appears in the Phelps map 

of the Battle of Seattle, reproduced elsewhere in this book.20

37 Little Crossing-Over Place sdZéédZul7aleecH (lit. ‘little crossing 

of the back’)

The name refers to a small portage. Up to eight longhouses once existed

here; only the ruins of one remained when Seattle was founded in

1852. Waterman penned his informant’s description of the site as fol-

lows: “In the vicinity of the present King Street Station in the city of

Seattle, there was formerly a little promontory with a lagoon behind it.

On the promontory were a few trees. Behind this clump of trees a trail

led from the beach over to the lagoon, which gave rise to the name. There

was an Indian village on each side of this promontory. Flounders were

plentiful in the lagoon. This [the tidal marsh] is exactly where the King

Street Station now stands.”21 According to other informants who

worked with amateur ethnographer Arthur Ballard, this village was

located at the foot of Yesler Way. If that were the case, the name would

refer to the trail that crossed over the hill to Lake Washington in what

is now the Leschi neighborhood.

Pioneer daughter Sophie Frye Bass described a second trail that

came down to the Sound here: from the Renton area, it “straggled on 

to Rainier Valley and approximately along Rainier Avenue, then zig-

zagged across Jackson, Main, and King Streets to salt chuck (water).”22

A N  AT L A S  O F  I N D I G E N O U S  S E AT T L E  /  2 2 9



Until at least the Second World War, Whulshootseed speakers used

this name when referring to the modern city of Seattle.

38 Greenish-Yellow Spine qWátSéécH

This name for Beacon Hill may refer to the color of the hillsides; Gen-

eral Land Office survey field notes from the 1850s show that many

maples, alders, and other deciduous trees grew here.

2 3 0



Map 2: Southwest

This time we arrive from the south (from up the Sound), following the

West Seattle coastline and curving around into the estuary of the

Duwamish River. These waters connected the Duwamish people with

not only other Puget Sound Salish tribes such as the Suquamish and

Snohomish but also more distant Coast Salish groups like the Twana

of Hood Canal. Then we enter the lower valley of the Duwamish River,

where the intensity of environmental transformation is matched by the

intensity and density of indigenous inhabitance. The farther upriver

we go, the closer we get to the core territories of the Duwamish proper.

Beyond them lay the lands of the Stkamish, a group that became part

of the present-day Muckleshoot Tribe.

39 Place of Scorched Bluff dxWKWásoos

The bluffs here had black markings, hence the name. Such descriptive 

terms were critical for travelers on the Sound, who typically described

and conducted long voyages in terms of the number of points that were

passed during the journey rather than time or a consistent unit of

measurement.23

40 It Has Changes-Its-Face bas7ayáhoos 

Brace Point is one of two places in Seattle that was inhabited by a

horned snake, one of the most powerful spirits used by indigenous

healers. (The other site is 100.) The large red boulder on the shoreline

here was also associated with the spirit power; some people believed

the boulder could change its shape and that anyone who looked at it

would be twisted into a knot.

41 Tight Bluff CHuXáydoos

This former name of Point Williams describes the dense plant growth

on this headland and helped distinguish it from other points in the

promontory-based system of measurement described at entry 39. It 

is now the site of Lincoln Park.

A N  AT L A S  O F  I N D I G E N O U S  S E AT T L E  /  2 3 1



42 Capsized gWul

This inauspiciously named creek enters Puget Sound at the north end

of Lincoln Park. The old name might be a warning about the offshore

potential for the tipping of a canoe. 

43 Rids the Cold Túsbud (lit. ‘implement for ridding cold’)

While the name of this site may be a reference to the battle of the winds

described at entries 82–88, since the fleeing North Wind was known 

to have alighted briefly at other places along the Sound, it is more likely

a reference to the bricks that were made out of clay here by settlers very

early in Seattle’s development. Native people would certainly have been

aware of the insulating properties of brick, even if they could rarely

afford to build their houses out of the new material.

44 Wealth Spirit teeyóóhLbaX

Jacob Wahalchoo, a signatory of the Treaty of Point Elliott, dove beneath

the waters of Puget Sound here in search of a spirit power that lived in

2 3 2

46

45

48
49

43

50

42

47

58
60

62

63

57

55

56

52

54

64
65

67
68

70

71
73

72
75

77
79

80
81

83

82

85

87
89

39

40

41

44

61

51

53

74

SOUTHWEST

78

99

98

93

76

59

69

66

84 86

88

1

001

38



a huge underwater longhouse. This power brought wealth and generos-

ity to those who held it. It could cause neighboring families to offer

their daughters in marriage without asking a bride-price or could make

game drop dead at its holder’s door during winter dances.24

45 Prairie Point sbaqWábaqs

An island connected to the mainland by two sandspits—a double

tombolo—this windswept place remains the birthplace of Seattle in

popular memory but was an indigenous place and point of colonial

reconnaissance well before 1851. Prairies here were almost certainly

maintained through seasonal burning by indigenous cultivators. Press-

ings of plants from this prairie, most now extirpated from Seattle, can

be found in the University of Washington’s botanical collections.

46 Place That Became Wet dxWqWóótoob

or

Place for Reeds dxWkóót7ee

Waterman and Harrington collected two different versions of the name

for this place. Luckily, they seem to corroborate each other in terms of

what kind of place it was: a wetland rich with resources such as high-

bush cranberries (Vaccinium oxycoccus), which were eaten fresh and

dried, and cattails (Typha latifolia), which were used in fabricating mats.

Many of Seattle’s upland areas, especially the West Seattle peninsula

and the Greenwood neighborhood, were filled with wetlands and bogs.

One such bog is currently being restored near this site, at Roxbury Park

at the headwaters of Longfellow Creek.

47 Low Point sgWudaqs

This ancient name for Duwamish Head can also mean ‘base of the

point’. This beach was an important fishing site; it was here that Cap-

tain Robert Fay tried to establish a commercial fishery employing 

men recruited by Seeathl. According to Duwamish elder Alice Cross,

there was once a large boulder covered with petroglyphs on the beach

near here, each carving symbolizing a spirit power employed by local

shamans.25

A N  AT L A S  O F  I N D I G E N O U S  S E AT T L E  /  2 3 3



48 Place of Waterfalls dxWtSútXood (lit. ‘where water falls over a bank’)

Shell middens have been found all along the shoreline near this steep

gully.

49 Caved-In asleeQW

As in many places around Seattle, the bluffs here are very unstable. In

fact, this part of the West Seattle landscape continues to live up to its

indigenous name, with elaborate restraints only partially able to keep the

land from moving during small earthquakes or periods of heavy rain.

50 Smelt t7áWee

This is a local form of the word for smelt, Hypomesus pretiosus; else-

where around Puget Sound it was called ChaW or ChaWoo. The indige-

nous name for Longfellow Creek suggests a traditional fishery. Carbon

dating of the remains of an old shellfish gathering and fishing camp-

site here shows it was in use as far back as the fourteenth century.

Today, local residents are struggling to restore the creek and its salmon

runs; despite their efforts in the upper watershed, the old estuary is

still straddled by industrial development, most notably a busy foundry.

Smelt, meanwhile, have largely disappeared from Elliott Bay: the shal-

low-sloped gravel beaches with freshwater seepage, upon which they

depend for spawning, have almost all been destroyed by development.

51 Herring’s House Tóó7ool7altxW

This was an important town; it included at least four longhouses and

an enormous potlatch house, and middens have been found through-

out this area. Important figures residing here included a headman

named Tsootsalptud and a shaman called Bookelatqw. Two sisters-in-

law of Big John, an important informant and early fishing-rights advo-

cate among the Skwupabsh (Green River People, who lived upriver

from Auburn), came from this village as well. The burning of Herring’s

House in 1893 is one of the few times when the destruction of indige-

nous Puget Sound settlements by Americans appeared in the official

historical record. Its name has since been applied to a city park along

the Duwamish River, located at the site of entry 61. 

2 3 4



52 Burned-Off Place dxWpásHtub

This small spit at the foot of Beacon Hill was likely an ideal place for

camping, and its name suggests there may have been a small cultivated

prairie here as well. Billy and Ellen Phillips, a Duwamish Indian cou-

ple, managed to eke out a living at the foot of nearby Stacy Street until

1910.

53 Little-Bit-Straight Point tutúhLaqs

Waterman recorded this small promontory on an island as the location

of a small stockade and lookout, used to defend settlements farther

upriver. During a land claims case in the 1920s, however, Duwamish

and Muckleshoot elder Major Hamilton testified that three longhouses

had also once been located here. Long buried under fill, the site is near

the old Rainier Brewery along Interstate 5.26

54 Canoe Opening slóóweehL

This word, like its diminutive form (108), has two meanings. It can

refer to the tiny holes made in canoes during carving to help measure

hull thickness. Informants told Waterman with respect to this site that

the name refers to channels, or ‘canoe-passes’, in the grassy marsh

through which canoes can be pushed to effect a shortcut. 

55 A Cut XWuQ

This was the widest of the several mouths of the Duwamish River, which

once carried the commingled flows of the White, Green, Black, Cedar, 

and Sammamish rivers. Today, only the waters of the Green enter

Elliott Bay. 

56 Uprooted Trees qulquládee

or

Bad Bank qulqulééqad

Waterman and Harrington recorded differing versions of the name for

this site along the shore of XWuQ (55). Both of them agreed, however,

that the name referred to the limited access to the site. The similarity

in their pronunciation suggests that one of them, after being misheard

A N  AT L A S  O F  I N D I G E N O U S  S E AT T L E  /  2 3 5



or misremembered, could have easily shifted to the other. Together,

however, they paint a vivid picture of this place, now somewhere in 

the middle of Seattle’s industrial harbor. 

57 Tideflats TSúqas (lit. ‘rotten or fermented flats’) 

This is where Seetoowathl and his wife starved to death in their float

house. Kellogg Island, a wildlife preserve on the lower Duwamish, is 

a remnant of an original, larger island.

58 Crying Face XaXaboos

A small creek, likely fed by springs “weeping” from the face of the hill-

side, flowed across a small flat here. Tribal elders testified in the 1920s

that three longhouses once stood here; the many middens found in the

area are reminders of that lost settlement.

59 Cottonwood Trees QwadQWad7ééQWatS

Black cottonwoods (Populus trichocarpa) were, and still are, relatively

common in the Duwamish estuary. While cottonwood leaves and bark

had some medicinal uses, this name has the suffix -atS, which actually

refers to the whole, growing tree as opposed to its component parts. 

60 Backwater sqabqabap (lit. ‘very still bottom’)

This quiet place in the river, on the south side of Kellogg Island, exists

today as the last remaining bend of the Duwamish River’s original

course.

61 Basketry Hat yulééqWad

Around a millennium ago, the Seattle Fault violently and suddenly

slipped several meters, dramatically altering the nature of this place.

Despite such catastrophes, excavations done here in the 1970s and

1980s show that indigenous people used this site for several centuries

both before and after the earthquake. As early as the first century bce,

when the site was an open, wet terrace above the river, people camped

here during the spring to harvest fish and roots. By the time of the

earthquake the site was being used far more intensively: faunal remains

2 3 6



from that period were overwhelmingly those of salmon but also

included dogfish, cod, grebes, deer, seals, mussels, clams, octopuses,

elderberry, and wild onions. After the earthquake, the site was higher

and drier and became a permanent settlement surrounded by forest. 

Muckleshoot informants in the 1920s recalled hearing of three

houses located here on the west bank of the river, each 60 feet wide by

120 feet long, although the site appears to have been abandoned during

the epidemics of the 1770s. The name refers to a type of woven hat worn

by Yakama women, suggesting trade networks across the Cascades,

while a clay-pot fragment found here may have come from the Columbia

River. When the Port of Seattle uncovered the settlement in the 1970s,

the resulting excavation provided the unrecognized Duwamish Tribe

with a highly visible venue for their claims. This site is now Herring’s

House Park, a name that has “migrated” upstream from the site of

entry 51. The Duwamish hope to someday build a longhouse and cul-

tural center facing the park across West Marginal Way.27

62 Giant Horsetail Place XubXubálee

This grassy, level, and very wet place was rich with giant horsetails

(Equisetum telmateia), whose little black roots were peeled and eaten

raw. As one of the first green plants to appear in the spring, these 

were an important source of food and nutrients after a long winter 

of preserved foods. 

63 Aerial Duck Net Place tuqbálee

As at the site of entry 32, a large trap stood here along a river bend at

the foot of the bluffs. Enormous flocks of waterfowl would have popu-

lated the rich estuary of the Duwamish, particularly during spring and

autumn migrations, making nets like these hugely successful. By the

early twentieth century, though, most of the birds were gone, and the

imposing net structures were a largely forgotten technology.

64 Fish Drying Rack TáleecH (lit. ‘covering for sliced [fish]’)

Wooden frames for drying fish were set up along the bank at what is

now known as Puget Creek. One of the salmon runs that would have

A N  AT L A S  O F  I N D I G E N O U S  S E AT T L E  /  2 3 7



been harvested here, the Duwamish chinook (Oncorhynchus

tshawytscha), is now listed under the Endangered Species Act.

65 Head of the Shortcut taTLqééd (lit. ‘head of extension between two

points’)

The river curled back on itself here, creating a convenient detour at

high tide. 

66 Little Bends at the Tail End poopii7álap

The name of this small creek which flows into the Duwamish River is

actually a diminutive form of the name of the Puyallup River, which

flows into Puget Sound at Tacoma. Both names describe the curves of

a watercourse’s lower course.

67 Lots of Douglas Fir Bark cHhLcHácHabeed (lit. ‘made [fire]

increaser’)

Unlike entry 59, which refers to an entire tree, this name lacks the 

-atS suffix and thus refers only to the useful parts of the Douglas fir

tree. Indigenous people used Douglas fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii) pri-

marily for firewood because of its easily collected bark, hence its name

of ‘fire increaser’. Preferring drier soils, this species is uncommon in

estuaries, but here along the base of Beacon Hill, ancient lahars (cata-

strophic mudflows) from Mount Rainier built up a higher, drier terrace

with ideal growing conditions for the huge conifer. Tiny pieces of fir

found by archaeologists at the site of entry 61 quite possibly came from

this very place, which is now part of the Georgetown neighborhood.

68 Missing in the Middle soob7éédgWas

The name refers to the middle section of the bank having caved in. 

It seems possible that this name and the following one in fact refer to

the same place. This one was collected by Harrington; entry 69 was

collected by Waterman.

2 3 8



69 Eroded Bank bee7abtub (lit. ‘bank has been acted upon by usual

means’)

At this place, sand and other debris constantly fell into the water as the

river ate away at the lahar terrace on its eastern bank. When the King

County Poor Farm was built here in the nineteenth century, its gardens

benefited from the shell-enriched soil of ancient middens.

70 House Post tSQWálad

According to Waterman’s informants, the river curved here in a way

reminiscent of the forked cedar posts used to hold up longhouse roofs.

71 House Beams TahLTahLoosad

This site’s name refers to a house’s crossbeams. One of Harrington’s

informants said that at one time there had been a village here, but that

there was “nothing but sticks left” by the early twentieth century. The

name may be a description of those ruins. 

72 Hand Causing Ill Will huCHsácHee 

The original course of the river still exists here, in the form of a chan-

nel dead-ending among industrial buildings on East Marginal Way just

south of Ellis Street. Indian people who worked with Waterman called

this a “bad place” because of its resident spirits. In deep time, the

Changer came upon two men fighting here. He transformed one into 

a cottonwood on the west bank and the other into a white fir (Abies

grandis) on the east bank, and bright sparks were said to fly between

the two ancient enemies even in Waterman’s informants’ time. 

The name of the site refers to a third spirit, which lived in the river

itself, occasionally rising above the water in the form of a hand missing

its fingers. Such a hand was known to other Coast Salish groups as

well. There was a “bad hand” in Maggie Lake in Duhlelap Twana terri-

tory on Hood Canal. In Steilacoom territory south of Tacoma, a “large

human hand, opened flat with the fingers close together,” was a feature

of American Lake. Native people believed that if “the hand slowly dis-

appeared again into the water the beholder was sure of a near death.”28

A N  AT L A S  O F  I N D I G E N O U S  S E AT T L E  /  2 3 9



73 Abandoned hLuwáhLb

This place-name refers to a former river channel that, having become

an oxbow lake, was no longer used by travelers. The oxbow saw a ren-

aissance of sorts in the early twentieth century when it was dredged 

to create the Duwamish Waterway. 

74 Place of the Fish Spear dxWqWééTLtud

This site was situated on a large flat in a bend of the Duwamish River.

Waterman mistook his informant’s description of this town’s site (“a

large open space; a plain”) for the meaning of its name. Sam Tecum-

seh, whose ancestors once lived here, said in the 1920s that the town

included two large longhouses and several acres of potatoes. The vil-

lagers are said to have been described as “proud or confident people.”

Once the site of the Georgetown race track, it now lies under the north

end of Boeing Field. The author of a 1949 Seattle Business article

offered a powerful description of this place’s history, writing that the

area was once “just reed-grown duck marsh” but was now inhabited 

by “mechanical birds for test and flight.”29

75 Rafter Support Post tuCH7was (lit. ‘sticks into the rib’)

An old trail, likely from the vicinity of entry 94, came down to the 

river here. A landslide had buried the trail, and Waterman posited that

some of the trees that had slipped with the earth might have looked 

like braces used to support a house’s rafters, thus inspiring the name.

76 High on the Neck tSuqálapsub

This narrow, necklike isthmus was the site of a small prairie where the

nutritious bulbs of the camas lily (Camassia quamash), and surely other

plant resources, were cultivated and gathered.

77 Lift It Over xWáPeecHad

This was a wide flat at the southern end of the abandoned river chan-

nel. While Waterman did not understand the name’s meaning, it likely

refers to the portaging of canoes.

2 4 0



78 Beach Worm’s Throat Qeeyawálapsub

The creature after which this site—an expansive flat containing three

hills in the present-day South Park neighborhood—is named was

identified by local informants in two ways: as an eel or as a long, green

beach worm that inhabits driftwood and can be used as bait. The con-

fusion may stem either from the superficial resemblance between the

two animals or from an informant’s not knowing the precise English

term for an organism he of course knew well. The solution is found 

in a Suquamish place-name, sQuyáwub, which is based on Quyáw

‘long green grubs’ that are found in old logs. Candidate species include

blennies of various genera and nereid worms (Nereis spp.).30

79 Much Paddle-Wood XoobXoobtay

According to General Land Office surveys of the 1850s (as well as tribal

informants), a grove of Oregon ash (Fraxinus latifolia) grew on this flat

in a bend of the river. It was the favored wood for paddles among

many of the Northwest’s indigenous peoples.

80 Hollers after Eating TSeeTSQdééb

“Hollers after eating’ is the name of a small, active shorebird that bobs 

up and down and has a loud cry, possibly the lesser yellowlegs (Tringa

melanoleuca) or the spotted sandpiper (Actitus macularia). 

81 Sweat House gWúXW7altxW

This is the name of a small creek entering the Duwamish River. The 

Southern Puget Sound Salish, including the Duwamish, used sweat

bathing for bodily cleanliness and to aid physical well-being, but not as

a cure to any serious ailment. This contrasts with the Northern Puget

Sound Salish, who used it in preparation for spirit questing.31

82 Meanie sXayáKW 

Three hills (82, 85, and 87) sit near each other in this part of the Duwam-

ish Valley. Once islands in an arm of Puget Sound, they remained largely

unchanged as catastrophic lahars created the valley floor around them 

in the millennia since the last ice age. Not surprisingly, they are land-

A N  AT L A S  O F  I N D I G E N O U S  S E AT T L E  /  2 4 1



marks in indigenous mythology, being the site of an epic battle between

great forces of nature. Although this hill’s name was translated by Water-

man as ‘beaver’, the name he recorded is actually the diminutive form

of the word for a mean person, a fitting description given the story

recounted below. 

In addition to their mythic significance, the hills here served a more

practical purpose as places to keep watch for friends and enemies.

Muckleshoot elder Dosie Wynn recalled that her grandmother had told

her “they climbed up on them rocks. And they had scouts, Indian

scouts, and they could look out [from] there.” Today, the Boeing Access

Road exit from Interstate 5 crosses over part of this hill, and Airport

Way cuts deep through its core in what must have been a very expen-

sive off-ramp.32

83 North Wind stóóbul7oo

There are many versions of the epic associated with this part of the

Duwamish Valley. Most, however, focus on a great battle between

North Wind, a force of cold and betrayal (and the ‘meanie’ of entry 82),

and Storm Wind, who ultimately vanquished North Wind and helped

establish the present-day climate. This place, located on the hillside to

the west of the river, was the site of North Wind’s ancient village. The

epic suggests the persistence of deeply held memories stretching back

to the retreat of the great ice sheets.33

84 Barrier quláXad

A ridge of stone in the riverbed, visible at low tide from the footbridge

at South 112th Street, is all that remains of North Wind’s ice weir, which

had once kept salmon from swimming upstream to Storm Wind’s

people. According to one version of the story, the Barrier also served 

as a demarcation of territory during the myth period, when trespassers

were hanged. After North Wind fled the area, the portion of his fish

weir that was not washed away in a flood was turned to stone. In the

postcontact period, the same word by which this site was known was

used for ‘fence’ or ‘stockade’.34

2 4 2



85 Beaver stuqáxW (lit. ‘dammer’)

This second hill is associated both with the story of the winds, described

above, and a story about beavers, given below. Local Indian people have

maintained the memory of these hills and their stories despite dramatic

changes to the landscape. Also known locally as Poverty Hill, the site

has recently been preserved; eventually, interpretive signs and restored

native plantings will highlight the valley’s rich history and ecology.

86 Little North Wind stóótooblu

This was a small rock on the west side of the river above 84 and down-

hill from 85. It was usually submerged, but during low tide it was out

of the water. This tidal fluctuation mimics that portion of the myth in

which North Wind kept setting his daughter by the river. Every time 

he did so, the water would rise because her icy earrings would melt.35

87 Caused to Be Burnt or Blackened sQWul7ads

The name of this place refers to dark striations on the hill. In the epic

story associated with this region, Raven, the slave of North Wind,

perched above South Wind’s grandmother, whose house was on this

stone mountain, and defecated down on her. The paintlike marks on

the hillside represented her face covered with the filth of Raven and her

own frozen tears.

This hill and Beaver (85) also feature in a story about a battle

between Beaver and five brothers, one of them imbued with Thunder

power, which split a single eminence into these two hills. Indigenous

people also claimed that splashing a canoe paddle in the river here or

pouring water against the hillside would bring rain.

Today, the north end of the hill has been quarried away and

replaced with an office park, while a new housing development covers

its southern slope and Highway 599 separates the hill from the river.

Muckleshoot elder Bena Williams told an interviewer that “when they

started having a quarry there, then I don’t think anybody goes there

anymore.”36

A N  AT L A S  O F  I N D I G E N O U S  S E AT T L E  /  2 4 3



88 Unclean Rock squlééls

Described as ‘unclean’ in the sense of impure or bad rather than sim-

ply unwashed, this location just a hundred yards upstream from Beaver

(85) is almost certainly connected to the story of the winds and most

likely refers to the befouling that South Wind’s grandmother was forced

to endure at the hands of the ‘meanie’ North Wind and his birds.

89 Inside Place dxWduW

The region farther upstream, away from the open saltwater, was known

as “inside” for its location inland off Puget Sound. This word is the

base of the term “Duwamish.” The valley where the Black, Cedar, and

White-Green rivers came together to form the Duwamish was a center

of indigenous settlement. There were towns here named Meeting of

the Rivers, Crags, Little Cedar River, and Confluence, and the area also

became an important refuge for local Native people during Seattle’s

urban development. Today, only the Green River flows through this

area, becoming the Duwamish below the former confluence with the

Black, which disappeared with the lowering of Lake Washington in

1916. (The Cedar was rerouted north to Lake Washington, and the

White was sent south to Tacoma.)

2 4 4



Map 3: Southeast

Leaving the Inside Place, we enter the homelands of the Lake People.

The richness of the place-names along the Seattle side of Lake Wash-

ington is mirrored by that on its eastern shores and around the edges

of Mercer Island.

90 Lake XacH7oo (lit. ‘great amount of water’) 

A generic term for large bodies of freshwater, XacH7oo gave its name

to the Hachooabsh, or Lake Indians, a branch of the Duwamish proper

who lived around the shores of Lake Washington. On some early maps

of the area, this lake appears as “Lake Duwamish.”

91 Swimming Hole sxWTéécHeeb (lit. ‘usual place to swim or wade’)

This town, located in what is now the Bryn Mawr neighborhood, was

reputedly the birthplace of Chesheeahud. It is unclear how many

houses were located here.

92 Ducklings tSééptSeep

This onomatopoetic place-name has been replaced by the name “Tay-

lor Creek,” which flows through Dead Horse Canyon on Seattle’s south-

eastern boundary. It may in fact be the name of a particular unidentified

species of small duck. 

93 Loon Place dxWwóóqWeeb

Loons would have found the Lake Washington shoreline an ideal habi-

tat, and this marshy area would have been a particularly good spot.

Prominent in Puget Sound mythology, Loon was a powerful spirit for

warriors, hunters, and the owners of slaves. This place-name is a little

puzzling in that the ending is -eeb instead of the expected -ad.37

94 Small Island TLúTLatSas

This is perhaps one of the best places to see the results of the lowering

of Lake Washington. Prior to the completion of the ship canal, there

had been a small island here, parallel to the shoreline and separated by

A N  AT L A S  O F  I N D I G E N O U S  S E AT T L E  /  2 4 5



a marsh where, according to Harrington’s informant, one “could pull

canoes through except for [the] reeds.” Today, “Pritchard’s Island” is

now firmly attached to the mainland, although the former marsh is still

a relatively wet area and is undergoing ecological restoration. A trail

beginning near here went west over the hills to the Duwamish River.

2 4 6

101

99

98
97

96

94

95

93

92

91

90

SOUTHEAST
37

52

53

54

56

65

67
68

70

71
73

72
75

74

77

79

80
81

83

82

85 89

78

76

001

34 35

36

38

69

66

86
84



95 Taboo Container XaXa7óólcH

Some kind of malevolent power or spirit being resided at this place,

now the site of Martha Washington Park. A Suquamish site near

Manette with a name based on the same root was called XáXa ‘to be

taboo’ and signified the location of canoe burials in trees. (There is 

no evidence, however, of such a use for this location.) The term XáXa

has a wide range of meanings, from ‘taboo’ and ‘forbidden’ to ‘holy’

and ‘sacred’ and also ‘ritually impure’.

96 High on the Neck tSuqálapsub

Indigenous people were most likely responsible for burning the open,

oak-dotted prairie slopes found near this isthmus by General Land

Office surveyors in the 1850s.

97 Noses squbáqst

Jutting out into Lake Washington, the Bailey Peninsula is home to

Seward Park and some of Seattle’s oldest trees. The name likely 

refers to the fact that the peninsula, which would have almost been 

an island before the lowering of the lake, has points at both its north

and south ends.

98 Cooking Fish on a Stick stSaKátSeed 

Low-lying Genesee Park was once Wetmore Slough, which reached

nearly to Columbia City’s business district. It mouth was blocked up

by logs and other debris that provided shelter for a large run of silver

(coho) salmon (Oncorhynchus kisutch). The name of the place refers to

one traditional method of cooking fish, still practiced today: the whole

fish is opened lengthwise, splayed on sticks, and leaned over an open

fire. A hop yard stood here in the nineteenth century, gathering in the

fruit of Native labor from the fields of Puget Sound country.

99 Breast, Nipple, Breast Milk sqúb7oo

The reason behind this name for a spring near Wetmore Slough has

been forgotten; it may be a reference to milky, mineral-laden waters 

or simply to its nourishing qualities.

A N  AT L A S  O F  I N D I G E N O U S  S E AT T L E  /  2 4 7



100 Changes-Its-Face s7ayá7oos

Leschi Park, named after the Nisqually warrior who led the assault on

Seattle in 1856, was once the home of a supernatural horned snake,

similar to the one at the site of entry 40. One of the most powerful

spirits available to Puget Sound shamans, Changes-Its-Face was enor-

mous, had retractable horns that resembled an elk’s antlers, could

also live in the sky, and could see in all directions. Young people were

warned to reject this spirit if at all possible, perhaps because of the

heavy punishments meted out against healers who failed to cure their

patients, but also because it could cause its holder to do malevolent

things. One of Harrington’s informants told him that the serpent that

resided here departed during the early years of urban expansion.38

101 Saw-Grass Point xWqWééyaqWayaqs

This site was a place for gathering tules, or bulrushes (Scirpus acutus),

which were woven into everyday household mats and screens. It was

also the eastern end of a trail from Little Crossing-Over Place (37); 

as such, it served as the departure point for Leschi’s attack on Seattle.

Settlers used the trail as well, and the beach here became a popular

“wilderness” destination during the city’s early years and eventually

part of the city’s string of public spaces along the Lake Washington

shoreline.

2 4 8



Map 4: Northeast

Besides being home to the Lake People, Lake Washington was also a

transition to the Duwamish backcountry. The people living near the

headwaters of the Sammamish watershed (the Sammamish River

enters Lake Washington from the northeast) were often regarded as lower

class by their neighbors, in part because they had direct access neither

to the riches of Puget Sound nor to trade routes across the Cascades.

Nothing captures this sense of “backwoodsness” more than the phrase

used by coastal people to admonish an ill-bred child or an adult with

bad taste by referring to a poor town in the remote hinterland:

“deehLeehL cHuXW u tee7eehL tool7ál sQWaX” (This person is like

someone from Issaquah).39

102 It Has Wolves bastiqééyoo

Wolves once hunted throughout what is now Seattle but had been

extirpated by the time white settlement reached the shores of Lake

Washington. 

103 Chopped XeeTL

or

Gnawed XeeTLéél 

Two slightly different names were collected for the shoreline south 

of Madison Park. Waterman’s name, Chopped, probably refers to

dense forest that would have provided fine timber for canoes and

house posts. Harrington’s version, however, refers to things that have

been gnawed, and his informant figured that there must have been

beavers here. Prior to the excesses of the fur trade, beavers shaped the

landscape nearly as much as their indigenous human neighbors by

creating ponds and wetlands.

104 It Has Skate Fish baskWéékWee7hL 

Skates, as a saltwater species, did not live in Lake Washington; this

name more likely refers to the low, flat shape of the land here at what

is now Madison Park.

A N  AT L A S  O F  I N D I G E N O U S  S E AT T L E  /  2 4 9



105 Little Island stéétcHee

Now the southern half of Foster Island in the Washington Park Arbore-

tum, this was a cultural site associated with the site of entry 108.

106 Baby Fathom stáhLahL

The fathom, or more correctly the width of an adult’s outstretched arms,

was a common unit of measurement in Puget Sound indigenous life.

This diminutive version of ‘fathom’ could also mean ‘niece’ or ‘nephew’.

2 5 0

90

114

10

102

103

104

105

106

107

111

112

113

NORTHEAST

16

20

19

1817

21

22

23

24

13 15

14

2

3

108

115

116
117

118

119120

121

122

231

124

251

261

271

091

1



107 Carry a Canoe sxWátSadweehL

In 1854, pioneer leader Thomas Mercer visited Lake Union and envi-

sioned a canal that would someday link the lake to Puget Sound and

Lake Washington. In the 1860s, a settler named John Pike began dig-

ging a canal here by hand, and for a time there was a small log flume

that connected the two lakes. Indigenous people had been crossing

this isthmus for centuries, either carrying their canoes or shoving

them along an intermittent creek that appeared when Lake Washing-

ton overflowed. General Land Office surveys from the 1850s show a

well-worn “Indian trail” just north of here, approximately where the

Burke-Gilman Trail is now, and oral tradition cites another trail to 

the south. With all this traffic, then, one wonders if the idea of the

“union” of lakes and Sound was really Thomas Mercer’s after all.

108 Little Canoe Channel shLoowééhL (lit. ‘little canoe hole’) 

Bearing the diminutive form of the name of entry 54, this was an

important town with at least five longhouses and a large fishing weir

on Ravenna Creek. The remains of that weir were exposed when Lake

Washington was lowered in 1916; any evidence of the town itself has

long been obscured by development around today’s University Village

shopping mall.

109 [Unknown] dxWTLusH

Green Lake must have been a fine fishing spot, surrounded by deep

woods and close to the town at Little Canoe Channel (108). In addition

to the salmon run in the lake’s outlet, which we now call Ravenna

Creek, the lake was known for suckers (Catostomus sp.) and perch

(Perca sp.), the latter, interestingly enough, an introduced species, sug-

gesting that Native fishermen visited this place well after resettlement

by non-Indians.

110 Red Paint lééQtud

Licton Springs bears one of Seattle’s few modern place-names derived

directly from Whulshootseed. People came here to gather clay, which

A N  AT L A S  O F  I N D I G E N O U S  S E AT T L E  /  2 5 1



was baked and mixed with tallow to create a red paint.40 The area was

one of David Denny’s properties, then a health spa, and finally a street-

car suburb. The rust-red springs are still visible today in Licton

Springs Park.

111 Dear Me! ádeed

This small cove was an important place to gather to play slahal, the

bone game; its name is an exclamation that must have echoed out over

the water during many a session. Waterman’s informant said that this

place was “set aside” as a camping spot for Indians. This was most

likely during the 1870s, when Henry Yesler operated a sawmill on the

cove and would have needed all the workers he could get. The bone

game sessions surely continued after a hard day’s work in the mill.

112 Drying House sHab7altxW

Exposed to the sun and to winds off the lake, this point would have

been an ideal place for drying salmon in open frame structures.

Waterman noted that his Indian collaborators also referred to this

place as Whiskey Point, perhaps a reference to the liquor obtained 

via the cash and contacts made at Yesler’s mill.41

113 Place of Whitened Clay dxWTSáxWub 

White clay was found here at the base of steep, forested cliffs. Mixed

with grease, earth pigments like those from here and Licton Springs

(110) are still used in important ceremonies.

114 Minnows, or Shiners TLeels

Lake Washington was home to many kinds of fish, from the huge 

sturgeon (Acipenser transmontanus) and the prolific sockeye salmon

(Oncorhynchus nerka) to smaller species like those caught at what 

is now the private Windermere Park.

115 Small Prairie Point babqWábaqs

To indigenous foragers, the similar, but slightly different, prairie names

around Seattle likely each signaled a different suite of plant resources.

2 5 2



Some might have had particularly good camas, while others were bet-

ter for salal or rice-root lily. In other words, the subtle diversity of

names for similar kinds of places likely mirrored subtle forms of eco-

logical diversity.

116 Digging in the Water CHa7áhLqoo

Lakes throughout the region were thought to be connected to Puget

Sound. In this case, a hunter was dragged into Lake Washington by an

elk he had wounded, and the bodies of both were found a month later

on the shore of Puget Sound at Richmond Beach, north of Seattle.

(Compare entry 34.) The name of this outlet to a small pond at today’s

Sand Point, however, is almost certainly a reference to the gathering of

wapato (Sagittaria latifolia), a starch-rich aquatic tuber that once grew

prolifically in the 4,000 acres or so of wetlands around the shores of

Lake Washington.42

117 Sand People WeestalbabsH

Before it was filled by the navy, this pond at Sand Point was known 

for a short time as Mud Lake. Efforts are under way to restore some 

of the marshes here. 

118 Fog sqWsub

This is the name for Sand Point, an extensive, flat promontory. Fog 

is a feature of the lakefront here during certain times of the year. 

119 Snowberry TudáxWdee

Snowberry (Symphoricarpos albus) was used to disinfect festering sores,

and its inedible fruit was used as an indicator of the size of a given

year’s run of dog salmon (Oncorhynchus keta): the more plentiful the

berries, which were referred to as the salmon’s eye, the more plentiful

the run. Snowberry thickets have been replaced here by the massive

buildings of the former naval air station.

120 Much Inner Cedar Bark slágWlagWatS 

Pontiac Bay, once a stop on the Seattle, Lakeshore, and Eastern Rail-

A N  AT L A S  O F  I N D I G E N O U S  S E AT T L E  /  2 5 3



way, was before that a place for gathering the bark used in everything

from baskets to diapers.

121 Hunt by Looking at the Water xWeexWééyaqWayas

The fact that this name refers to hunting, rather than fishing, suggests

that hunters would seek deer or other animals that came down to the

shore here.

122 Silenced (or Quieted) Place dxWXóóbud

There was at least one longhouse here at the mouth of Thornton Creek.

Stone tools and an adze have been found in the watershed between

here and site 123. Farther up the watershed, on the 7200 block of

Twenty-eighth Avenue Northeast, is a huge boulder that according 

to local lore was an indigenous gathering place located at a junction 

of the upland trail system.43

123 Bald (or Peeled) Head hLooQWqeed

Remnants of this upland marsh can still be seen at North Seattle Com-

munity College, but a sense of the larger sweep of Bald Head can be

gained by driving on Interstate 5 and noticing the “bowl” in which the

college and Northgate Mall now sit. One of the sources of Thornton

Creek, these wetlands would have been an ideal place for gathering

highbush cranberries, marsh tea (Ledum groenlandicum), and other

resources.

124 Osprey’s House TSeeXTSeeX7altxW

Waterman incorrectly identified the large nest here as belonging 

to an eagle. Ospreys (Pandion haliaetus) continue to nest around the

shores of Lake Washington.

125 Thunderbird’s House XWeeqWádee7altxW

In Puget Sound Salish religion, Thunderbird is one of the most pow-

erful spirits, offering skills of oratory, wealth, bravery, and health to

those, including Seeathl, who have held it. Thunderbird’s child is

Thrush (Catharus spp.), who brought languages to the various human

2 5 4



peoples. According to some elders, Thunderbird was a small, pure-

white bird, about the size of a gull. But for most, it was a giant bird

(probably the condor, Gymnogyps californianus). In either case, it threw

off pieces of flint, or lightning, from its open mouth as it flew, while

the sound of thunder came from the beating of its wings. Thunder-

bird was thought to live here on the lakeshore at the edge of this tall

bluff. At least some of the Puget Sound Salish believed that the Thun-

derbird made its home in a rock (note nearby boulders at 122 and 127).44

126 Deep Point sTLúpaqs

According to Waterman’s informants, people who swam here on the

edge of the lake were often taken away by “something.” 

127 It Has a Rock basCHééTLa

This tiny stream, which runs in a deep ravine just north of the Seattle

city line, is now officially known as Bsche’tla Creek thanks to a group

of neighbors who asked the Lake Forest Park City Council to restore

its original name. A large glacial erratic sits near the creek’s mouth.

A N  AT L A S  O F  I N D I G E N O U S  S E AT T L E  /  2 5 5




























NOTES

1 / The Haunted City

1. Only a handful of North American places use Native imagery to market

themselves as explicitly as Seattle does. The American Southwest, and especially

Santa Fe, have a long history of using local (and other) Indian motifs. Vancouver,

Victoria, and many other British Columbian places have used Northwest Coast

imagery for a long time. For studies of these two regions and their employment 

of Native iconography, see Leah Dilworth, Imagining Indians in the Southwest: Per-

sistent Visions of a Primitive Past (Washington: Smithsonian Institution, 1996); and

Michael Dawson, Selling British Columbia: Tourism and Consumer Culture, 1890–

1970 (Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 2004).

2. William Kittredge, The Nature of Generosity (New York: Alfred A. Knopf,

2000), 8. While the term “place-stories” is mine, the concept is inspired by the

work of others. E.g., see Keith H. Basso, Wisdom Sits in Places: Landscape and Lan-

guage among the Western Apache (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press,

1996); Crisca Bierwert, Brushed by Cedar, Living by the River: Coast Salish Figures 

of Power (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1999), esp. 36–71; and Dolores

Hayden, The Power of Place: Urban Landscapes as Public History (Cambridge, MA:

MIT Press, 1995).

3. Carol Lind, Western Gothic (Seattle: Lind, 1983), 2; Babs Babylon, “In the Dark:

Casper Central,” Seattle Weekly, 26 October 1994, 59; Jessica Amanda Salmonson,

The Mysterious Doom and Other Ghostly Tales of the Pacific Northwest (Seattle: Sas-

quatch Books, 1992), 3–12, 91–102, 137–42; and personal communications with

Jay Miller and with Dana Cox, Seattle Underground Tours.

4. For the original printing of the speech attributed to Seeathl, see the 29

October 1887 edition of the Seattle Star. For reprintings and embellishments of

the speech in local histories, see Frederick James Grant, History of Seattle, Wash-

ington (New York: American, 1891); Clarence B. Bagley, History of King County,

Washington (Chicago: S. J. Clarke, 1929); and Roberta Frye Watt, Four Wagons

West: The Story of Seattle (Portland, OR: Metropolitan Press, 1931). See also Eric

2 5 7



Scigliano, “Shaping the City: A New Book Looks Over a Changing Urban Space,”

Seattle Times Pacific Northwest Magazine, 10 November 2002.

5. For discussion of the Chief Seattle Speech and its various interpretations

and uses, see Rudolf Kaiser, “Chief Seattle’s Speech(es): American Origins and

European Reception,” in Recovering the Word: Essays on Native American Literature,

ed. Brian Swann and Arnold Krupat (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of

California Press, 1987), 497–536; Vi Hilbert, “When Chief Seattle Spoke,” in A

Time of Gathering: Native Heritage in Washington State, ed. Robin K. Wright (Seat-

tle: University of Washington Press, 1991), 259–66; Denise Low, “Contemporary

Reinventions of Chief Seattle: Variant Texts of Chief Seattle’s 1854 Speech,” Amer-

ican Indian Quarterly 19, no. 3 (1995): 407–22; Albert Furtwangler, Answering

Chief Seattle (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1997); and Crisca Bierwert,

“Remembering Chief Seattle: Reversing Cultural Studies of a Vanishing Amer-

ican,” American Indian Quarterly 22, no. 3 (1998): 280–307. 

6. Jean-Claude Schmitt, Ghosts in the Middle Ages: The Living and the Dead in

Medieval Society, trans. Teresa Lavender Fagan (Chicago: University of Chicago

Press, 1998), 1; Judith Richardson, Possessions: The History and Uses of Haunting 

in the Hudson Valley (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2003), 3–6;

Renée Bergland, The National Uncanny: Indian Ghosts and American Subjects

(Hanover, NH: University Press of New England, 2000), 3; and Marian W. 

Smith, The Puyallup-Nisqually (New York: Columbia University Press, 1940), 97.

7. Timothy Egan, The Good Rain: Across Time and Terrain in the Pacific North-

west (New York: Vintage Books, 1990), 90.

8. Jack Cady, Street: A Novel (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1994), 13, 25; Tom

Robbins, Still Life with Woodpecker (New York: Bantam Books, 1980), 69, 132;

Jonathan Raban, Hunting Mr. Heartbreak: A Discovery of America (New York:

Edward Burlingame Books, 1991), 261–62.

9. Cady, Street, 34–36; Sherman Alexie, Indian Killer (New York: Atlantic

Monthly Press, 1996), 195, 409.

10. Grant Cogswell and Rick Levin, “Screw the Space Needle: Seattle’s True

Landmarks,” Seattle Stranger, 21 September 2000, 38–39; Emily Baillargeon,

“Seattle Now: A Letter,” New England Review 20, no. 2 (1999): 148; and Brian

Goedde, “Visions of the Ave: Despite Fears of Failure, the U-District’s Heart Is

Still Beating,” Seattle Real Change, 20 September 2001, 8–9.

11. For examples of urban pictorials, see John W. Reps, Panoramas of Promise:

Pacific Northwest Towns and Cities in Nineteenth-Century Lithographs (Pullman:

Washington State University Press, 1984). For images of Indians in the American

imagination, the classic work remains Robert F. Berkhofer Jr., The White Man’s

Indian: Images of the American Indian from Columbus to the Present (New York:

Knopf, 1978). Images of Gast’s American Progress can be found easily on the 

Internet; one example is the Central Pacific Railroad Museum website, at cprr

2 5 8



.org/Museum/Ephemera/American_Progress.html. For the 1906 real-estate

brochure, see C. B. Bussell, Tide Lands: Their Story (Seattle: n.p., 1906).

12. For discussion of Western cities and their hinterlands, see Richard C.

Wade, The Urban Frontier: The Rise of Western Cities, 1790–1830 (Cambridge, MA:

Harvard University Press, 1959); William Cronon, Nature’s Metropolis: Chicago and

the Great West (New York: W. W. Norton, 1991); and Gray Brechin, Imperial San

Francisco: Urban Power, Earthly Ruin (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of Cali-

fornia Press, 1999). For three of the handful of works linking indigenous history

to urbanization in the American West, see Lisbeth Haas, Conquests and Historical

Identities in California, 1769–1936 (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of Cali-

fornia Press, 1995); Kate Brown, “Gridded Lives: Why Kazakhstan and Montana

Are Nearly the Same Place,” American Historical Review 106, no. 1 (2001): 17–48;

and Eugene P. Moehring, Urbanism and Empire in the Far West, 1840–1890 (Reno:

University of Nevada Press, 2004). For the frontier’s place in American thinking

about the West, see John Mack Faragher, ed., Rereading Frederick Jackson Turner:

The Significance of the Frontier in American History and Other Essays (New York: 

H. Holt, 1994); Henry Nash Smith, Virgin Land: The American West as Symbol and

Myth (New York: Vintage Books, 1957); and Kerwin Lee Klein, Frontiers of Histori-

cal Imagination: Narrating the European Conquest of Native America, 1890–1990

(Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1997).

13. A complete list of works on Native history in the West would be too long 

to include here. For a beginning overview of the literature, see Clyde A. Milner II,

Carol A. O’Connor, and Martha Sandweiss, eds., The Oxford History of the Amer-

ican West (New York: Oxford University Press, 1996).

14. General studies of urban Indians include W. T. Stanbury, Success and Fail-

ure: Indians in Urban Society (Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press,

1975); Alan L. Sorkin, The Urban American Indian (Lexington, MA: Lexington

Books, 1978); Russell Thornton, Gary D. Sandefur, and Harold G. Grasmick, The

Urbanization of American Indians: A Critical Bibliography (Bloomington: Indiana

University Press, 1982); and Donald L. Fixico, The Urban Indian Experience in

America (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 2000). For published

studies of postwar urban Indian institutions and identities, see S. A. Krouse, “Kin-

ship and Identity: Mixed Bloods in Urban Indian Communities,” American Indian

Culture and Research Journal 23, no. 2 (1999): 73–89; Edmund Danziger, Survival

and Regeneration: Detroit’s American Indian Community (Detroit: Wayne State Uni-

versity, 1991); Joan Weibel-Orlando, Indian Country, L.A.: Maintaining Ethnic Com-

munity in Complex Society (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1991); Deborah

Davis Jackson, Our Elders Lived It: American Indian Identity in the City (DeKalb:

Northern Illinois University Press, 2002); Nicholas Rosenthal, “Repositioning

Indianness: Native American Organizations in Portland, Oregon, 1959–1975,”

Pacific Historical Review 71, no. 3 (2002): 415–38; Nancy Shoemaker, “Urban Indi-

N O T E S  T O  C H A P T E R  1  /  2 5 9



ans and Ethnic Choices: American Indian Organizations in Minneapolis, 1920–

1950,” Western Historical Quarterly 19, no. 4 (1988): 431–47; and especially Amer-

ican Indian Culture and Research Journal 22, no. 4 (1998), a special issue devoted

to urban Indian identity and literature. For Seattle-based studies, see Howard M.

Bahr, Bruce A. Chadwick, and Joseph H. Stauss, “Discrimination against Urban

Indians in Seattle,” Indian Historian 5, no. 4 (1972): 4–11; Bruce A. Chadwick and

Joseph H. Stauss, “The Assimilation of American Indians into Urban Society:

The Seattle Case,” Human Organization 34, no. 4 (1975): 359–69; Bruce A. Chad-

wick, Joseph Stauss, Howard M. Bahr, and Lowell K. Halverson, “Confrontation

with the Law: The Case of the American Indians in Seattle,” Phylon 37, no. 2

(1976): 163–71; Larry E. Williams, Bruce A. Chadwick, and Howard M. Bahr,

“Antecedents of Self-Reported Arrest for Indian Americans in Seattle,” Phylon 40,

no. 3 (1979): 243–52; Jonathan R. Sugarman and David C. Grossman, “Trauma

among American Indians in an Urban Community,” Public Health Reports 111, 

no. 4 (1996): 321–28; Maria Aurora Holloway, “Illness Perception and Knowledge

among Seattle Urban Indians” (M.Nur. thesis, University of Washington, 1974);

and John Zoltan Bolyai, “The Seattle Diphtheria Epidemic of 1972–1973 and Its

Relationship to Diphtheria among North American Native Americans” (M.P.H.

thesis, University of Washington, 1974).

15. James P. Ronda, “Coboway’s Tale: A Story of Power and Places along the

Columbia,” in Power and Place in the North American West, ed. John M. Findlay

and Richard White (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1999), 3.

16. R. Cole Harris, “How Did Colonialism Dispossess? Comments from an

Edge of Empire,” Annals of the Association of American Geographers 94, no. 1

(2004): 165–82.

17. Edwin G. Burrows and Mike Wallace, Gotham: A History of New York City

to 1898 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999), xiv–xvi.

18. Greg Dening, Islands and Beaches: Discourse on a Silent Land, Marquesas,

1774–1880 (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1980), 3; Colleen J. McElroy,

“To the Crow Perched on Chief Sealth’s Fingertips,” in Traveling Music: Poems

(Ashland, OR: Story Line Press, 1998), 56.

2 / Terra Miscognita

1. Sophie Frye Bass, Pigtail Days in Old Seattle (Portland, OR: Metropolitan

Press, 1937), 13; Murray Morgan, Skid Road: An Informal Portrait of Seattle (New

York: Viking Press, 1951), 24.

2. Stephen Jay Gould, “The Creation Myths of Cooperstown,” in Bully for

2 6 0



Brontosaurus: Reflections in Natural History, by Stephen Jay Gould (New York: 

W. W. Norton, 1991), 48.

3. For further analysis of the diorama, see Coll-Peter Thrush, “Creation Sto-

ries: Rethinking the Founding of Seattle,” in More Voices, New Stories: King County,

Washington’s First 150 Years, ed. Mary C. Wright (Seattle: Pacific Northwest Histori-

ans Guild, 2002), 34–49.

4. Welford Beaton, The City That Made Itself: A Literary and Pictorial Record of

the Building of Seattle (Seattle: Terminal Publishing Co., 1914), 19; George F. Cot-

terill, Climax of a World Quest: The Story of Puget Sound, the Modern Mediterranean

of the Pacific (Seattle: Olympic Publishing Co., 1928). For one of the best examina-

tions of the “vanishing Indian” narrative in American culture and history (and for

its role in shaping federal Indian policy), see Brian W. Dippie, The Vanishing Amer-

ican: White Attitudes and U.S. Indian Policy (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas,

1982).

5. Jacob Wahalchoo’s story is recounted in Jay Miller, Lushootseed Culture and

the Shamanic Odyssey: An Anchored Radiance (Lincoln: University of Nebraska

Press, 1999), 11–12.

6. Paul Carter, The Road to Botany Bay: An Exploration of Landscape and His-

tory (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987), xxiv. Carter draws upon the

formulation crafted by geographer Yi-Fu Tuan in Space and Place: The Perspective 

of Experience (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1977), in which Tuan

distinguishes space—undifferentiated, abstract, untrammeled by experience—

from place, which is specific, local, and shaped by lived experience. See also

Daniel W. Clayton, Islands of Truth: The Imperial Fashioning of Vancouver Island

(Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 2000).

7. For information on Clear Water, see Clarence B. Bagley, “Chief Seattle and

Angeline,” Washington Historical Quarterly 22, no. 4 (1931): 243–75. For discus-

sions of indigenous towns in Puget Sound, see Jay Miller, Lushootseed Culture, 10. 

8. Marian Smith, Puyallup-Nisqually, 17; and Wayne M. Suttles, “Persistence of

Intervillage Ties among the Coast Salish,” in Coast Salish Essays, by Wayne M. Suttles

(Seattle: University of Washington Press; Vancouver: Talonbooks, 1987), 209–30.

9. Edmond S. Meany, ed., Vancouver’s Discovery of Puget Sound (New York:

Macmillan, 1907), 105, 108, 124. For analysis of the notion of “people without

history,” see Eric R. Wolf, Europe and People without History (Berkeley and Los

Angeles: University of California Press, 1982). For the most comprehensive study

of epidemics on the Northwest Coast, see Robert Boyd, The Coming of the Spirit of

Pestilence: Introduced Infectious Diseases and Population Decline among Northwest

Coast Indians, 1774–1874 (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1999). 

10. For a summary of archaeological information for the region, including

material drawn from at least one site in Seattle, see Charles M. Nelson, “Prehis-

N O T E S  T O  C H A P T E R  2  /  2 6 1



tory of the Puget Sound Region,” in Handbook of North American Indians, ed.

William C. Sturtevant, vol. 7, Northwest Coast, ed. Wayne Suttles (Washington:

Smithsonian Institution, 1990), 481–84. For linguistic evidence, see Wayne M.

Suttles, “Northwest Coast Linguistic History—a View from the Coast,” in Coast

Salish Essays, 265–81. For stories of the Changer, see Arthur C. Ballard’s collec-

tions Some Tales of the Southern Puget Sound Salish (Seattle: University of Wash-

ington Press, 1927) and Mythology of Southern Puget Sound (Seattle: University 

of Washington Press, 1929). For prehistoric natural disasters, see Arthur Krucke-

berg, A Natural History of Puget Sound Country (Seattle: University of Washington

Press, 1991); and Lynn L. Larson and Dennis E. Lewarch, eds., The Archaeology 

of West Point, Seattle, Washington: 4,000 Years of Hunter-Fisher-Gatherer Land Use 

in Southern Puget Sound (Seattle: Larson Anthropological/Archaeological Services,

1995). For the words arising from dookw, see Dawn Bates, Thom Hess, and Vi

Hilbert, Lushootseed Dictionary (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1994),

84–85.

11. Charles Wilkes, Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition during

the Years 1838, 1839, 1840, 1841, and 1842 (New York: G. P. Putnam, 1844), vol. 4,

483; and Edmond S. Meany, ed., “Diary of Wilkes in the Northwest,” Washington

Historical Quarterly 17 (1926): 139.

12. Meany, “Diary of Wilkes in the Northwest,” 137–40. For accounts of epi-

demics in the 1830s and 1840s, see Boyd, Coming of the Spirit of Pestilence, 155, 267.

For discussion of the Ex. Ex., see Nathaniel Philbrick, Sea of Glory: America’s Voy-

age of Discovery, the U.S. Exploring Expedition, 1838–1842 (New York: Viking, 2003).

For Fort Nisqually, see Cecelia Svinth Carpenter, Fort Nisqually: A Documented His-

tory of Indian and British Interaction (Tacoma, WA: Tahoma Research Services,

1986), and William Fraser Tolmie, The Journals of William Fraser Tolmie: Physician

and Fur Trader (Vancouver: Mitchell Press, 1963), 216.

13. Samuel Hancock, The Narrative of Samuel Hancock, 1845–1860 (New York:

R. M. McBride and Co., 1927), 94–95.

14. Arthur Armstrong Denny, Pioneer Days on Puget Sound (Seattle: C. B. Bagley,

Printer, 1888), 9–10; and undated George Brock obituary, Scrapbook 21, p. 7, Ore-

gon Historical Society, Portland.

15. Arthur Denny, Pioneer Days on Puget Sound, 10–12; Andrew Jackson Cham-

bers, Recollections (n.p., 1947), 28–29; Thomas W. Prosch, Chronological History of

Seattle from 1850 to 1897 (Seattle: n.p., 1900), 24; Watt, Four Wagons West, 28–29;

Frank Carlson, “Chief Sealth” (M.A. thesis, University of Washington, 1903), 26;

and Emily Inez Denny, Blazing the Way; or, True Stories, Songs, and Sketches of Puget

Sound and Other Pioneers (Seattle: Rainier Printing Co., 1909), 43.

16. Marian W. Smith, “Petroglyph Complexes in the History of the Columbia-

Fraser Region,” Southwest Journal of Anthropology 2, no. 3 (1946): 315; Roger Sale,

Seattle, Past to Present (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1976), 12; Arthur

2 6 2



Denny, Pioneer Days on Puget Sound, 10–12; and Thomas Talbot Waterman, Puget

Sound Geography, ed. Vi Hilbert, Jay Miller, and Zalmai Zahir (Seattle: Lushoot-

seed Press, 2001), 119–27.

17. Thomas Prosch, Chronological History, 22–24; Watt, Four Wagons West, 30–

32; and Emily Denny, Blazing the Way, 47–48. 

18. Arthur Denny, Pioneer Days on Puget Sound, 10–12; Emily Denny, Blazing

the Way, 49; and Archie Binns, Northwest Gateway: The Story of the Port of Seattle

(Garden City, NY: Doubleday, Doran, and Co., 1941), 32–41.

19. Stuart M. Blumin, “Explaining the New Metropolis: Perception, Depiction,

and Analysis in Mid–Nineteenth Century New York,” Journal of Urban History 11,

no. 1 (1984): 9–38; Burrows and Wallace, Gotham, 649–841.

20. For accounts of Knox County during this time, see Albert J. Perry, History

of Knox County, Illinois: Its Cities, Towns, and People (Chicago: S. J. Clarke Publish-

ing Co., 1912), 419–23, 447–49; and James E. Davis, Frontier Illinois (Blooming-

ton: Indiana University Press, 1998), 331–33. For the Denny family’s history in the

area, see Arthur Armstrong Denny, “Reminiscences,” Bancroft Collection, 5–8;

and Sale, Seattle, Past to Present, 8–9, 17.

21. Albert Perry, History of Knox County, 5, 44; Richard White, The Middle

Ground: Indians, Empires, and Republics in the Great Lakes Region, 1650–1815 (New

York: Cambridge University Press, 1991); J. Joseph Bauxar, “History of the Illinois

Area,” and Charles Callender, “Illinois,” in Handbook of North American Indians,

ed. William C. Sturtevant, vol. 15, Northeast, ed. Bruce G. Trigger (Washington:

Smithsonian Institution, 1978), 594–601, 673–80.

22. Albert Perry, History of Knox County, 43–44, 447; Charles C. Chapman,

History of Knox County, Illinois (Chicago: Blakely, Brown, and Marsh, Printers,

1878), 185–87; Rodney O. Davis, “The Frontier State, 1818–48,” in A Guide to the

History of Illinois, ed. John Hoffman (New York: Greenwood Press, 1991), 54; and

Clarence B. Bagley, History of Seattle from the Earliest Settlement to the Present Time,

vol. 2 (Chicago: S. J. Clarke, 1916), 824, 875.

23. Arthur Denny, Pioneer Days on Puget Sound, 13–14.

24. Ibid., 4–6, 8–9; Eugene E. Snyder, Early Portland: Stump-Town Triumphant

(Portland, OR: Binfords and Mort, 1970), 70; and Emily Denny, Blazing the Way, 42.

25. Watt, Four Wagons West, 49–51, 60.

26. Eva Greenslit Anderson, Chief Seattle (Caldwell: Caxton Printers, 1943),

161; Emily Denny, Blazing the Way, 56; Carlson, “Chief Sealth,” 26; Thomas Talbot

Waterman, “The Geographical Names Used by the Indians of the Pacific Coast,”

Geographical Review 12 (1922): 192; personal communication with Thomas Speer,

Duwamish Tribal Services.

27. Emily Denny, Blazing the Way, 57–58; interview with Walter Graham, Feb-

ruary 1914, MOHAI MS Collection, folder 348; Arthur Denny, Pioneer Days on

Puget Sound, 14; and Thomas Prosch, Chronological History, 26.

N O T E S  T O  C H A P T E R  2  /  2 6 3



28. Wayne Suttles, “The Early Diffusion of the Potato among the Coast Sal-

ish,” in Coast Salish Essays, 137–51; Thomas Prosch, Chronological History, 25–26;

Arthur Denny, Pioneer Days on Puget Sound, 13; and Watt, Four Wagons West, 55.

29. Arthur Denny, Pioneer Days on Puget Sound, 17; Watt, Four Wagons West,

53, 64–65, 67; and Ruth Sehome Shelton, Gram Ruth Sehome Shelton: The Wisdom

of a Tulalip Elder (Seattle: Lushootseed Press, 1995), 25–27.

30. Thomas Prosch, Chronological History, 28–29, 31, 41–42; Beaton, City

That Made Itself, 21; and Watt, Four Wagons West, 70.

31. For examples of the various speculations, see Carlson, “Chief Sealth,” 27;

Thomas Prosch, Chronological History, 29; Bagley, History of Seattle, vol. 2, 27; and

Watt, Four Wagons West, 70. Some modern-day Duwamish people see the naming

of the city as a theft of indigenous cultural property, especially cutting in light of

the dispossession they would later face. In personal communications with the

author, anthropologist Jay Miller has suggested that Seeathl may have seen the

naming as analogous to offering his name to a young descendant, thus ensuring

that the name would live on. Meanwhile, present-day Duwamish tribal activist

James Rasmussen has argued that Seeathl would in fact be proud of the city named

after him; for that claim, see B. J. Bullert’s documentary Alki: Birthplace of Seattle

(Seattle: Southwest Seattle Historical Society and KCTS Television, 1997).

32. Bierwert, Brushed by Cedar, 43–44; Watt, Four Wagons West, 58–59.

33. Arthur Denny, Pioneer Days on Puget Sound, 19.

3 / Seattle Illahee

1. Philip J. Thomas, Songs of the Pacific Northwest (Saanichton, BC: Hancock

House, 1979), 60–61. For accounts of the Fraser River gold rush, see R. Cole 

Harris, The Resettlement of British Columbia: Essays on Colonialism and Geographical

Change (Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 1997), esp. 103–36;

Andrea Laforet and Annie York, Spuzzum: Fraser Canyon Histories, 1808–1939

(Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 1999); Daniel P. Marshall, 

“No Parallel: American Miner-Soldiers at War with the Nlaka’pamux of the 

Canadian West,” in Parallel Destinies: Canadian-American Relations West of the 

Rockies, ed. John M. Findlay and Ken S. Coates (Seattle: University of Washing-

ton Press, 2002), 31–79; and Robert E. Ficken, Unsettled Boundaries: Fraser Gold 

and the British-American Northwest (Pullman: Washington State University Press,

2003).

2. David Kellogg to Vivian Carkeek, 20 May 1912, MOHAI MS Collection,

folder 116.

3. “Story of Alonzo Russell,” n.d. (1910s), MOHAI MS Collection, folder 526;

2 6 4



Caroline Leighton, Life at Puget Sound, with Sketches of Travel in Washington Terri-

tory, British Columbia, Oregon, and California, 1865–1881 (Boston: Lee and Shepard,

1884), 39–40; and Dillis B. Ward, “From Salem, Oregon, to Seattle, Washington,

in 1859,” Washington Historical Quarterly 6 (1915): 100.

4. “The Christmas Times,” Seattle Times, 14 December 1901; and Leighton,

Life at Puget Sound, 41–42.

5. Cornelius H. Hanford, ed., Seattle and Environs: 1852–1924 (Chicago: Pio-

neer Historical Publishing Co., 1924), 49.

6. David Kellogg to Vivian Carkeek, 20 May 1912; Jay Miller, Lushootseed Cul-

ture, 100–103. This was not an isolated event—Cornelius Hanford describes a

similar initiation, of an indigenous man named Sampson, taking place in 1858

(Seattle and Environs, 142).

7. Seattle Historical Society interview with Louisa Boren Denny, n.d., MOHAI

MS Collection, folder 258; Abbie Denny-Lindsley, “When Seattle Was an Indian

Camp Forty-Five Years Ago,” Seattle P-I, 15 April 1906; and Phoebe Goodell Jud-

son, A Pioneer’s Search for an Ideal Home: A Book of Personal Memoirs (Bellingham,

WA: Union Printing, Binding, and Publishing Co., 1925), 188.

8. Bass, Pigtail Days in Old Seattle, 31; Arthur Denny, Pioneer Days on Puget

Sound, 73; and Yvonne Prater, Snoqualmie Pass: From Indian Trail to Interstate

(Seattle: The Mountaineers, 1981), 7–29.

9. For accounts of the “Puget Sound Indian War” (or the “Treaty War,” as

many Indian people call it), see J. A. Eckrom, Remembered Drums: The Puget Sound

Indian War (Walla Walla, WA: Pioneer Press Books, 1989); and John Lutz, “Invent-

ing an Indian War: Canadian Indians and American Settlers in the Pacific West,

1854–1864,” Journal of the West 38, no. 3 (1998): 7–13.

10. Patricia Nelson Limerick, The Legacy of Conquest: The Unbroken Past of the

American West (New York: Norton, 1987), 35–54.

11. Thomas Prosch, Chronological History, 32; Edith Sanderson Redfield, Seat-

tle Memories (Boston: Lothrop, Lee, and Shepard Co., 1930), 31; John M. Swan nar-

rative, 6–7, Bancroft Collection; “Adventures of William T. Ballou,” 3, Bancroft

Collection; and Waterman, “Geographical Names,” 188; Thomas S. Phelps’s map

of Seattle, 1856, MSCUA negative UW4101.

12. Major J. Thomas Turner, “Reminiscences, 7 September 1914,” MOHAI

MS Collection, folder 106; Jane Fenton Kelly, “Trail of a Pioneer Family,” n.d.

(1910s), MOHAI MS Collection, folder 347; Redfield, Seattle Memories, 39; and 

J. G. Parker, “Puget Sound,” 4, Bancroft Collection.

13. Thomas Prosch, Chronological History, 29; Thomas F. Gedosch, “A Note on

the Dogfish Oil Industry of Washington Territory,” Pacific Northwest Quarterly 59,

no. 2 (1968): 100–102; Abbie Denny-Lindsley, “When Seattle Was an Indian Camp

Forty-Five Years Ago,” Seattle P-I, 15 April 1906; Catherine Blaine, “A Frontier

Sketch” (n.p., n.d.), MSCUA; Sophie Frye Bass, When Seattle Was a Village (Seattle:

N O T E S  T O  C H A P T E R  3  /  2 6 5



Lowman and Hanford, 1947), 44; and interview with Walter Graham, MOHAI MS

Collection.

14. Thomas Prosch, Chronological History, 53; Brad Asher, Beyond the Reserva-

tion: Indians, Settlers, and the Law in Washington Territory, 1853–1889 (Norman:

University of Oklahoma Press, 1999), 107–53; David Blaine and Catherine Blaine,

Memoirs of Puget Sound: Early Seattle, 1853–1856, ed. Richard A. Seiber (Fairfield,

WA: Ye Galleon Press, 1978), 76–77.

15. Henry L. Yesler, “Henry Yesler and the Founding of Seattle,” Pacific North-

west Quarterly 42 (1951): 274.

16. For a summary of the treaty process in Puget Sound, see Alexandra Har-

mon, Indians in the Making: Ethnic Relations and Indian Identities around Puget

Sound (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1998). For the

details of the process in Seattle and central Puget Sound, see Furtwangler, Answer-

ing Chief Seattle.

17. Shelton, Gram Ruth Sehome Shelton, 26; Emily Denny, Blazing the Way,

67–68.

18. Michael T. Simmons to Isaac Ingalls Stevens, 27 December 1855, and

Henry Yesler, David Phillips, C. C. Lewis, S. Samson Grow, and Thomas Mercer 

to C. H. Mason, 24 November 1855, Records of the Bureau of Indian Affairs,

Western Washington Agency, NARA.

19. Hanford, Seattle and Environs, 148; William N. Bell, “Settlement of Seat-

tle,” Bancroft Collection; and Emily Denny, Blazing the Way, 374–75; “Historic

Nisqually Chief Exonerated,” Seattle Times, 11 December 2004.

20. “The Indian War!!” Pioneer and Democrat, 1 February 1856; Henry L.

Yesler to Michael T. Simmons, 26 July 1856, Records of the Bureau of Indian

Affairs, Western Washington Agency, NARA; George A. Paige to Michael T. 

Simmons, 23 January 1857, Records of the Bureau of Indian Affairs, Western

Washington Agency, NARA; Commander S. S. Swarthout to Stevens, 31 August

1856, Records of the Bureau of Indian Affairs, Western Washington Agency,

NARA.

21. George A. Paige to Michael T. Simmons, 30 November 1856, Records of

the Bureau of Indian Affairs, Western Washington Agency, NARA; David S. May-

nard to Michael T. Simmons, 19 September 1856, Records of the Bureau of Indian

Affairs, Western Washington Agency, NARA; and M. Maloney, Capt. 4th Infantry

at Muckleshoot, to Lt. Col. S. Casey, 9th Infantry, Commander of Puget Sound

District at Fort Steilacoom, 24 November 1856, Records of the Bureau of Indian

Affairs, Western Washington Agency, NARA.

22. George A. Paige to Isaac Ingalls Stevens, 6 November 1856, Records of

the Bureau of Indian Affairs, Western Washington Agency, NARA; George A.

Paige to Isaac Ingalls Stevens, 30 June 1857, Records of the Bureau of Indian

Affairs, Western Washington Agency, NARA.

2 6 6



23. “Ordinances of the Town of Seattle,” Seattle Weekly Gazette, 4 March 1865.

24. “Petition to the Honorable Arthur A. Denny, Delegate to Congress from

Washington Territory,” n.d., NARA, roll 909.

25. Arthur Denny, Pioneer Days on Puget Sound, 72–73.

26. For an account of the 1960s television show, see Walt Crowley, Rites of

Passage: A Memoir of the Sixties in Seattle (Seattle: University of Washington Press,

1995), 260–61. For information on Asa Shinn Mercer, see Roger Conant, Mercer’s

Belles: The Journal of a Reporter (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1960);

and Lawrence M. Woods, Asa Shinn Mercer: Western Promoter and Newspaperman,

1839–1917 (Spokane: Arthur H. Clark Co., 2003). For similar experiments with 

the importation of white women north of the border, see Adele Perry, On the Edge

of Empire: Gender, Race, and the Making of British Columbia, 1849–1871 (Toronto:

University of Toronto Press, 2001).

27. Charles W. Smith, “Asa Shinn Mercer, Pioneer in Western Publicity,”

Pacific Northwest Quarterly 27 (1936): 355; New York Times, 26 January 1866; Puget

Sound Daily, 2 June 1866.

28. Charles Prosch, Reminiscences of Washington Territory: Scenes, Incidents,

and Reflections of the Pioneer Period on Puget Sound (Seattle: n.p., 1904), 118; 

N. M. Bogart, “Reminiscences of Early Pioneer Days,” n.d., MOHAI MS Collec-

tion; Charles E. Roblin, Schedule of Unenrolled Indians, n.d. (1919), U.S. Depart-

ment of the Interior, Office of Indian Affairs, NARA; Yesler, “Henry Yesler and 

the Founding of Seattle,” 275; “Eldest Daughter of Henry Yesler Is Dead,” Seattle

Times, 12 February 1907; “Death of Yesler’s Daughter, Julia,” Seattle P-I, 17 Febru-

ary 1907; and Kathie Zetterberg and David Wilma, “Henry Yesler’s Native Amer-

ican Daughter Julia Is Born on June 12, 1855,” www.historylink.org.

29. Blaine and Blaine, Memoirs of Puget Sound, 120–21; Charles Prosch, Remi-

niscences, 27; Robin D. Sword, “The ‘Saloon Crowd’ and the ‘Moral Darkness of

Puget Sound,’” Pacific Northwest Forum 4, no. 1 (1991): 95–101.

30. W. W. Miller, “A Circular,” Washington Standard, 21 September 1861;

Asher, Beyond the Reservation, 63–68; Harmon, Indians in the Making, 77–78; and

Charles Prosch, Reminiscences, 27. For analysis of similar laws throughout the

American West, see Peggy Pascoe, “Race, Gender, and the Privileges of Property:

On the Significance of Miscegenation Law in the U.S. West,” in Over the Edge:

Remapping the American West, ed. Valerie J. Matsumoto and Blake Allmendinger

(Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1999), 215–30. 

31. Morgan, Skid Road, 59–60; William C. Spiedel, Sons of the Profits, or There’s

No Business Like Grow Business: The Seattle Story, 1851–1901 (Seattle: Nettle Creek

Publishing Co., 1967), 112–14; Marjorie Rhodes, ed., King County Censuses: 1870

U.S. Census and 1871 Territorial Census for King County, Washington Territory (Seat-

tle: Marjorie Rhodes, 1993), 33; and A. Atwood, Glimpses in Pioneer Life on Puget

Sound (Seattle: Denny-Correll, 1903), 149.

N O T E S  T O  C H A P T E R  3  /  2 6 7



32. Hilman F. Jones Papers (YS-26), box 1, file 28, Special Collections, Wash-

ington State Historical Society, Tacoma.

33. “The End of the Small-Pox,” Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 16 January 1876;

“Small-Pox,” Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 29 December 1876. 

34. “The Small-Pox Question,” Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 30 December 1876;

Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 14 March 1877.

35. Daily Intelligencer, 12 June 1877; “More on the Small-Pox,” Seattle Daily

Intelligencer, 25 May 1877; “Small-Pox Statistics,” Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 30 July

1877; “Claimed to Be an Indian,” Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 15 February 1878; “Small

Pox—a Word of Caution,” Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 19 February 1878; and “The

Small-Pox Case,” Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 20 February 1878. For similar patterns

of prejudice facing other communities of color in the West, see Nayan Shah, Con-

tagious Divides: Epidemics and Race in San Francisco’s Chinatown (Berkeley and Los

Angeles: University of California Press, 2001); and William Deverell, “Plague in

Los Angeles: Ethnicity and Typicality,” in Matsumoto and Allmendinger, eds.,

Over the Edge, 172–200.

36. For the history of fire in American cities, see Christine Meisner Rosen,

The Limits of Power: Great Fires and the Process of City Growth in America (New

York: Cambridge University Press, 1986); for a regional study, see Daniel E.

Turbeville III, “Cities of Kindling: Geographical Implications of the Urban Fire

Hazard on the Pacific Northwest Coast Frontier, 1851–1920” (Ph.D. diss., Simon

Fraser University, 1986). Quotations come from “Forewarned, Forearmed,” 

Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 15 May 1878; “Another Warning,” Seattle Daily Intelli-

gencer, 18 September 1878; and “A Nuisance,” Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 9 May

1878.

37. “Seattle in Ashes,” Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 27 July 1879; “A Big Blaze,”

Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 8 May 1878; “Made Room,” Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 

9 May 1878; and logbook, Thomas W. Prosch Papers, box 1, folder 4, MSCUA. 

For what remains the best overview of the political and cultural battles over

whether Seattle would be an “open” or “closed” town, see Morgan, Skid Road.

38. Logbook, Thomas W. Prosch Papers, MSCUA.

4 / Mr. Glover’s Imbricated City

1. “Birds-Eye View,” Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 30 May 1878; and “A Beautiful

View,” Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 31 May 1878.

2. David Hamer, New Towns in the New World: Images and Perceptions of the

Nineteenth-Century Urban Frontier (New York: Columbia University Press, 1990),

49. See also Reps, Panoramas of Promise. 

2 6 8



3. Charles A. Kinnear, “Arrival of the George Kinnear Family on Puget Sound,

and Early Recollections by C. A. Kinnear, One of the Children,” n.d., MOHAI MS

Collection.

4. Bates, Hess, and Hilbert, Lushootseed Dictionary, 78. For Puget Sound 

basketry traditions, see Nile Thompson and Carolyn Marr, Crow’s Shells: Artistic

Basketry of Puget Sound (Seattle: Dushuyay Publications, 1983).

5. For a snapshot portrayal of Seattle during this period, see David M. Buerge,

Seattle in the 1880s, ed. Stuart R. Grover (Seattle: Historical Society of Seattle and

King County, 1986).

6. Except where stated otherwise, the data given here come from the manu-

script of the tenth census of the United States, NARA.

7. Redfield, Seattle Memories, 19. 

8. Thomas Prosch, Chronological History, 287–88.

9. Mrs. E. E. Heg, “The Beginnings of Trinity Church, Seattle,” Seattle Church-

man 13, no. 2 (1900): 3–6; Atwood, Glimpses in Pioneer Life, 89–90.

10. King County Marriage Records, Puget Sound Branch, Washington State

Archives, Bellevue.

11. Bass, When Seattle Was a Village, 23–25. 

12. “A Wise Course,” Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 13 May 1878.

13. “The Duwamish Road,” Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 12 March 1878; “Duwamish

Doings,” Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 4 March 1880; and “The County Farm,” Seattle

Daily Intelligencer, 10 February 1877.

14. “Belltown,” Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 22 March 1878; “A Skeleton Found,”

Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 21 August 1876; “Improvements near Lake Union,” Seat-

tle Daily Intelligencer, 15 May 1879; “Lake Union Suburb,” Seattle Daily Intelligencer,

20 September 1879; “Salmon Bay,” Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 12 November 1877;

“Salmon Bay,” Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 23 September 1879; and “A Choice Loca-

tion,” Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 9 April 1878.

15. Charles E. Roblin, Schedule of Unenrolled Indians, n.d. (1919), U.S.

Department of the Interior, Office of Indian Affairs, NARA; J. A. Costello, The

Siwash: Their Life, Legends, and Tales (Seattle: Calvert, 1895), 86–87; Real Property

Assessment and Tax Rolls, Puget Sound Branch, Washington State Archives,

Bellevue; Margaret Wandrey, Four Bridges to Seattle: Old Ballard, 1853–1907 (Seattle:

Wandrey, 1975), 21, 25, 82; Nile Thompson, “The Original Residents of Shilshole

Bay,” in Passport to Ballard: The Centennial Story (Seattle: Ballard News Tribune,

1998), 14; Paul Dorpat, “Indian Charlie,” Seattle Times, 29 January 1984; and

Waterman, “Geographical Names,” 189.

16. “Indian Taxpayers,” Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 3 December 1879. For

detailed discussion of Dzakwoos and his family, see Jay Miller and Astrida R.

Blukis Onat, Winds, Waterways, and Weirs: Ethnographic Study of the Central Link

Light Rail Corridor (Seattle: BOAS, 2004), 78–85.

N O T E S  T O  C H A P T E R  4  /  2 6 9



17. “Indian Taxpayers,” Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 3 December 1879; Costello,

Siwash, 86–87.

5 / City of the Changers

1. Interview with Ollie Wilbur by Lynn Larson, 26 May 1994, Alki/Transfer

CSO Facilities Project Traditional Cultural Properties, MIT; Waterman, Puget

Sound Geography, 23.

2. Amelia Sneatlum, recorded by Warren Snyder, 1955, and reprinted in Robin

K. Wright, ed., A Time of Gathering: Native Heritage in Washington State (Seattle:

University of Washington Press, 1991), 262.

3. The notion of “dispossession by degrees” comes from Jean M. O’Brien,

Dispossession by Degrees: Indian Land and Identity in Natick, Massachusetts, 1650–

1790 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997). One of O’Brien’s primary

arguments is that indigenous persistence (which in the case of the Natick involved

staying in place, becoming individual landholders, and intermarrying with the

non-Native population) ironically led to an erosion of corporate access to and use

of traditional places. Although in a different place and time, the story of Seattle’s

indigenous people, and of the Duwamish Tribe in particular, seems to follow a

similar pattern.

4. Rudyard Kipling, From Sea to Sea and Other Sketches: Letters of Travel, vol. 2

(Garden City, NY: Doubleday, Page, and Co., 1925), 93–94.

5. James R. Warren, The Day Seattle Burned (Seattle: J. R. Warren, 1989); and

Colin E. Tweddell, “Historical and Ethnological Study of the Snohomish Indian

People,” in Coast Salish and Western Washington Indians, vol. 2 (New York: Garland

Publishing, 1974), 552–53. 

6. Orange Jacobs, Memoirs of Orange Jacobs (Seattle: Lowman and Hanford,

1908), 189–90.

7. “To-Day’s Doings,” Seattle P-I, 14 September 1883; “Jubilate” and “The Dec-

orations,” Seattle P-I, 15 September 1883; Kurt E. Armbruster, Orphan Road: The

Railroad Comes to Seattle, 1853–1911 (Pullman: Washington State University Press,

1999).

8. “Indians Burned Out,” Seattle Times, 7 March 1893. According to anthropol-

ogist Jay Miller, tribal oral tradition claims that Watson was in fact an agent of the

West Seattle Land Improvement Company. No documentary records that might

confirm this allegation are known to exist.

9. Clay Eals, ed., West Side Story (Seattle: West Seattle Herald, 1987), 27, 94,

97; Bass, When Seattle Was a Village, 118–19; and interview with Harold Moses and

2 7 0



Gilbert King George by Lynn Larson, 22 June 1994, Alki/Transfer CSO Facilities

Project Traditional Cultural Properties, MIT.

10. Duwamish et al. vs. the United States of America, Consolidated Petition No. 

F-275 (Seattle: Argus Press, 1993), 683–87, 695, 701.

11. Miller and Onat, Winds, Waterways, and Weirs, 82–83.

12. “Indians Burned Out,” Seattle Times, 7 March 1893; Army Corps of Engi-

neers, Duwamish-Puyallup Surveys, 1907, Army Corps Archives, Seattle; Roblin,

Schedule of Unenrolled Indians, n.d. (1919), U.S. Department of the Interior,

Office of Indian Affairs, NARA.

13. Bass, When Seattle Was a Village, 118–19.

14. “Angeline Is No More,” Seattle P-I, 1 June 1896; “Who Shall Bury Her?”

Seattle P-I, 2 June 1896; “Angeline’s Funeral,” Seattle P-I, 5 June 1896; “Angeline’s

Funeral,” Seattle P-I, 6 June 1896; and Mrs. Victor Zednick, “When I Was a Girl,”

Seattle Times, 19 January 1927.

15. “Poor Old Angeline,” Seattle P-I, 2 August 1891; Henry L. Yesler, “The

Daughter of Old Chief Seattle,” Pacific Magazine 1, no. 3 (1889): 25–27; “Angeline

Is No More,” Seattle P-I, 31 May 1896; “The Last Indian Princess,” Northwest Mag-

azine, August 1896, 15; Edmond S. Meany, “Princess Angeline,” Seattle Argus, 21

December 1901, 11–12; Thomas Prosch and C. T. Conover, comps., Washington, the

Evergreen State, and Seattle, Its Chief City (Seattle: T. F. Kane, 1894); One Hundred

Views about Seattle, the Queen City (Seattle: R. A. Reid, 1911); and “Seattle Histori-

cal Pageant Attracts Pioneer Interest,” Seattle Times, 18 May 1930.

16. Mason Whitney, ed., Magnolia: Memories and Milestones (Seattle: Magnolia

Community Club, 2000).

17. For accounts of Chesheeahud—whose name is spelled various ways—and

Tleebuleetsa, see John Peabody Harrington, The Papers of John Peabody Harrington

in the Smithsonian Institution, 1907–1957, ed. Elaine L. Miles (New York: Kraus

International Publications, 1981), frame 0498; Edmond S. Meany, “The Last Lake

Union Indians,” Seattle Times, 11 June 1898; “Indian John in Hospital,” Seattle

Times, 8 February 1905; “Indian John Holds Potlatch,” Seattle P-I, 29 May 1906;

and Edmond S. Meany, “Story of Seattle’s Nearest Indian Neighbors,” Seattle P-I,

29 October 1905. For information on Hiram Gill, see Morgan, Skid Road, 169–

81; and Sale, Seattle: Past to Present, 107–8, 118–19.

18. “Chief Seattle’s Nephew Ruined by Gale,” Seattle P-I, 6 January 1910;

“Fund Is Started for Indian Billy,” Seattle P-I, 7 January 1910; and “Members of

Dying Race Whom Advance of Progress Crowds Off Seattle Waterfront,” Seattle 

P-I, 11 May 1910.

19. S. A. Eliot, Report upon the Conditions and Needs of the Indians of the North-

west Coast (Washington: Government Printing Office, 1915), 21; Duwamish et al. 

vs. United States, 4; and Frank W. Porter III, “Without Reservation: Federal Indian

N O T E S  T O  C H A P T E R  5  /  2 7 1



Policy and the Landless Tribes of Washington,” in State and Reservation: New 

Perspectives in Federal Indian Policy, ed. George Pierre Castile and Robert L. Bee

(Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1992).

20. Applications for Enrollment and Allotment of Washington Indians,

1911–19, NARA, microfilm M1343, roll 3; “Lake Union John, Aged 90, Buried,”

Seattle P-I, 12 February 1910; and Baist’s Real Estate Atlas of Surveys of Seattle, Wash.

(Philadelphia: Baist, 1905), plate 14.

21. “Chief Seattle’s Nephew Billy Ruined by Gale,” Seattle P-I, 6 January 1910;

“Fund Is Started for Indian Billy,” Seattle P-I, 7 January 1910; “Help Comes for

Old Indian Billy,” Seattle P-I, 8 January 1910; Thompson, “Original Residents of

Shilshole Bay,” 15.

22. “Siwashes Again Seek the Streets,” Seattle P-I, 31 May 1904; “Squaw

Comes to Meet Mrs. Leary,” Seattle P-I, 12 November 1907; “Mary Seattle Is Badly

Hurt,” Seattle Times, 15 April 1906; “Our Citizens of Yesterday,” Seattle Argus, 22

December 1900; and Abbie Denny-Lindsley, “When Seattle Was an Indian Camp

Forty-five Years Ago,” Seattle P-I, 15 April 1906.

23. Waterman, “Geographical Names”; Edmond S. Meany Papers, MSCUA;

Calhoun, Denny, and Ewing advertisement, Seattle P-I, 23 May 1909; “Thousand

at Opening of the Licton Plat,” Seattle P-I, 23 May 1909.

24. Don Sherwood, “Interpretive Essay: Licton Springs,” Don Sherwood 

Collection, MSCUA; Paul Burch, “The Story of Licton Springs,” The Westerner 9,

no. 4 (1908): 19, 34.

25. Carl Abbott, “Footprints and Pathways: The Urban Imprint on the Pacific

Northwest,” in Northwest Lands, Northwest Peoples: Readings in Environmental His-

tory, ed. Dale D. Goble and Paul W. Hirt (Seattle: University of Washington Press,

1999), 113.

26. The finest treatment of Seattle’s environmental history is Matthew W.

Klingle, “Urban by Nature: An Environmental History of Seattle, 1880–1970”

(Ph.D. diss., University of Washington, 2001). See also Mike Sato, The Price of

Taming a River: The Decline of Puget Sound’s Duwamish/Green Waterway (Seattle:

The Mountaineers, 1997); Dick Paetze, Pioneers and Partnerships: A History of 

the Port of Seattle (Seattle: Port of Seattle, 1995); and Paul Dorpat and Genevieve

McCoy, Building Washington: A History of Washington State’s Public Works (Seattle:

Tartu Publications, 1998).

27. Reginald Heber Thomson, with Grant H. Redford, That Man Thomson

(Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1950), 106–8; and Hiram M. Chitten-

den, “Sentiment versus Utility in the Treatment of National Scenery,” Pacific

Monthly 23 (January 1910): 29–38.

28. Leonie Sandercock, Towards Cosmopolis: Planning for Multicultural Cities

(Chichester, U.K.: John Wiley and Sons, 1998); Rose Simmons, “Old Angeline,

the Princess of Seattle,” Overland Monthly 20 (November 1892): 506.

2 7 2



29. Waterman, “Geographical Names,” 476; M. J. Carter, “Lake Washington’s

New Beach Line,” Seattle Town Crier, 14 April 1917.

30. Quoted in Sato, Price of Taming a River, 57; Meany, “Story of Seattle’s 

Nearest Indian Neighbors,” Seattle P-I, 29 October 1905.

31. Thomas Talbot Waterman, Notes on the Ethnology of the Indians of Puget

Sound (New York: Heye Foundation, 1973), x.

32. Harrington, Papers, frames 344, 392, 409–12; Waterman, Puget Sound

Geography, 23–34; and Ballard, Mythology of Southern Puget Sound, 35–41.

33. Interview with Art Williams by Lynn Larson, 3 May 1994, Alki/Transfer

CSO Facilities Project Traditional Cultural Properties, MIT.

34. Ibid.; Cesare Marino, “History of Western Washington since 1846,” 

in Suttles, ed., Handbook of North American Indians, 175; Duwamish et al. vs. 

United States, 701; Charles M. Buchanan, “The Rights of the Puget Sound 

Indians to Game and Fish,” Washington Historical Quarterly 6, no. 2 (1916):

109–18; Bass, Pigtail Days in Old Seattle, 16; and Bass, When Seattle Was 

a Village, 118–19.

35. Wandrey, Four Bridges to Seattle, 154; Harrington, Papers, frame 344; 

Marian Smith, “Petroglyph Complexes,” 315.

36. Harrington, Papers, frames 409–12; Don Sherwood, “Interpretive Essay:

Alki Playground,” Don Sherwood Collection, MSCUA.

37. Warren Snyder, Southern Puget Sound Salish: Texts, Place Names, and Dictio-

nary (Sacramento: Sacramento Anthropological Society, 1968), 117–19; Patricia

Slettvet Noel, Muckleshoot Indian History (Auburn, WA: Auburn School District,

1980); June M. Collins, “John Fornsby: The Personal Document of a Coast Salish

Indian,” in Indians of the Urban Northwest, ed. Marian W. Smith (New York: Colum-

bia University Press, 1949); Russel Barsh, “Puget Sound Indian Demography,

1900–1920: Migration and Economic Integration,” Ethnohistory 43 (1996): 65–

97; and Webster and Stevens photograph, ca. 1911, of Suquamish tribal members

waiting on Colman Dock after attempting to obtain land payments in Seattle,

MOHAI 83.10.7,723.

38. Interview with Florence Wynn by Lynn Larson, 15 June 1994, Alki/

Transfer CSO Facilities Project Traditional Cultural Properties, MIT; “Great-

Granddaughter of Seattle Is Hostess at Her Home in Suquamish,” Seattle Times,

29 November 1931; and Waterman, “Geographical Names,” 188.

39. Marian Smith, Puyallup-Nisqually, 54.

40. Waterman, “Geographical Names,” 188; Waterman, Puget Sound Geogra-

phy, 23; Gedosch, “Note on the Dogfish Oil Industry”; and interview with Ollie

Wilbur by Lynn Larson, 26 May 1994, Alki/Transfer CSO Facilities Project Tradi-

tional Cultural Properties, MIT.

41. Chittenden, “Sentiment versus Utility,” 31; Marian Smith, Puyallup-

Nisqually, 29.

N O T E S  T O  C H A P T E R  5  /  2 7 3



6 / The Woven Coast

1. For descriptions of Seattle in 1900, see James R. Warren, “A Century of Busi-

ness,” Puget Sound Business Journal, 17 September 1999; and Richard C. Berner,

Seattle, 1900–1920: From Boomtown, Urban Turbulence, to Restoration (Seattle: Charles

Press, 1991). For the origins of Ballast Island, see J. Willis Sayre, This City of Ours

(Seattle: Seattle School District, 1936), 69.

2. Manuscript of the twelfth census of the United States, NARA.

3. Viola Garfield, Seattle’s Totem Poles (Bellevue, WA: Thistle Press, 1996),

9–31; undated handbill (probably 1900s) by Lowman and Hanford Co., MSCUA.

4. “Hop Pickers,” Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 27 August 1878.

5. Larson and Lewarch, Archaeology of West Point, 10–12.

6. Costello, Siwash, 120; Abbie Denny-Lindsley, “When Seattle Was an Indian

Camp, Forty-five Years Ago,” Seattle P-I, 15 April 1906; Robert Galois, with Jay

Powell and Gloria Cranmer Webster, Kwakwaka’wakw Settlements, 1750–1920: A

Geographical Gazetteer (Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 1994),

55; “The Northern Indians,” Olympia Pioneer and Democrat, 17 October 1856; and

“Indian Difficulty on the Reserve,” Olympia Pioneer and Democrat, 12 December

1856. See also Mike Vouri, “Raiders from the North: The Northern Indians and

Northwest Washington in the 1850s,” Columbia 11, no. 3 (1997): 24–35; and Lutz,

“Inventing an Indian War.”

7. For British Columbia Indians’ participation in the hops industry, see John

Lutz, “Work, Sex, and Death on the Great Thoroughfare: Annual Migrations of

‘Canadian Indians’ to the American Pacific Northwest,” in Parallel Destinies: 

Canadian-American Relations West of the Rockies, ed. John M. Findlay and Ken Coates

(Toronto: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2002), 80–103. For an excellent analy-

sis of these migrations and their implications for Native identities (and percep-

tions of those identities), see Paige Raibmon, Authentic Indians: Episodes of

Encounter from the Late-Nineteenth-Century Northwest Coast (Durham, NC: Duke

University Press, 2005).

8. “Hop Pickers,” Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 30 August 1879; Seattle Daily Intel-

ligencer, 16 October 1876; and “Hop Picking,” Seattle Daily Intelligencer, 4 Septem-

ber 1878.

9. Norman Kenny Luxton, Tilikum: Luxton’s Pacific Crossing (Sidney, BC: Gray’s

Publishing, 1971), 40; Jacobs, Memoirs, 161; Ruth Kirk, Tradition and Change on the

Northwest Coast: The Makah, Nuu-chah-nulth, Southern Kwakiutl, and Nuxalk (Seat-

tle: University of Washington Press, 1986), 117.

10. Annual Report of 1891, 169, Department of Indian Affairs, BCA; Charles

Nowell and Clellan J. Ford, Smoke from Their Fires: The Life of a Kwakiutl Chief

(Hamden, CT: Archon Books, 1941), 132–33; Annual Report of 1906, 255, Depart-

2 7 4



ment of Indian Affairs, BCA; and Annual Report of 1887, 105, Department of

Indian Affairs, BCA. 

11. King County Death Records, Puget Sound Branch, Washington State

Archives, Bellevue; Annual Report of 1888, 103, 114, Department of Indian Affairs,

BCA; and Annual Report of 1891, 118, Department of Indian Affairs, BCA.

12. Nora Marks Dauenhauer, Haa Kusteyí, Our Culture: Tlingit Life Stories

(Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1994), 13, 289–95; Thomas Fox Thorn-

ton, “Place and Being among the Tlingit” (Ph.D. diss., University of Washington,

1995); and Walter R. Goldschmidt, Haa Aaní, Our Land: Tlingit and Haida Land

Rights and Use (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1998).

13. Undated letter (1887?) from Daniel Quedessa to Kenneth G. Smith, Ken-

neth G. Smith Papers, MSCUA; Annual Report of 1884, 100, Department of Indian

Affairs, BCA; Annual Report of 1891, xxxi, Department of Indian Affairs, BCA.

14. Arthur Wellington Clah, Diary, 1859–1909, entry for 31 August 1899,

National Archives of Canada, Ottawa; Philip Drucker, The Northern and Central

Nootkan Tribes, Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 144 (Washington: Smith-

sonian Institution, 1951), 13–14.

15. Charles Moser, Reminiscences of the West Coast of Vancouver Island (Victoria:

Acme Press, 1926), 143; Colonel John W. Foulkes, “Jesus Will Save an Irishman,”

in American Life Histories: Manuscripts from the Federal Writers’ Project, 1936–1940

(Washington: Library of Congress, 1998); Elizabeth Colson, The Makah Indians: 

A Study of an Indian Tribe in Modern American Society (Minneapolis: University 

of Minnesota Press, 1953), 159–67; and Daniel Quedessa to Kenneth G. Smith, 

1 November 1915, Kenneth G. Smith Papers, MSCUA.

16. Warren Snyder, Southern Puget Sound Salish, 107; interview with Art

Williams by Lynn Larson, 3 May 1994, Alki/Transfer CSO Facilities Project Tradi-

tional Cultural Properties, MIT.

17. Garfield, Seattle’s Totem Poles, 9. For the role of totem and mortuary poles in

traditional Tlingit society, see George Thornton Emmons and Frederica de Laguna,

The Tlingit Indians (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1991), 193–96.

18. There have been many accounts—often differing—of this event. For a

balanced synthesis of the various versions, see Garfield, Seattle’s Totem Poles.

19. William J. Lampton, “The Totem Pole,” Seattle P-I, 3 September 1899.

20. Thomas Prosch, Chronological History, 205–6; and Ted C. Hinckley, The

Americanization of Alaska, 1867–1897 (Palo Alto, CA: Pacific Books, 1972). See also

Kathryn Morse, The Nature of Gold: An Environmental History of the Klondike Gold

Rush (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2003).

21. Douglas Cole, Captured Heritage: The Scramble for Northwest Coast Artifacts

(Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1985); Ted C. Hinckley, “The Inside Pas-

sage: A Popular Gilded Age Tour,” Pacific Northwest Quarterly 56, no. 2 (1965): 67–

74; Alaska: “Our Frontier Wonderland” (Seattle: Alaska Bureau, Seattle Chamber of

N O T E S  T O  C H A P T E R  6  /  2 7 5



Commerce, 1915); John Muir, Travels in Alaska (New York: Houghton Mifflin,

1915), 276; and Kate C. Duncan, 1001 Curious Things: Ye Olde Curiosity Shop and

Native American Art (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2000), 175–81. 

See also Raibmon, Authentic Indians, for discussion of the “curio” trade.

22. John R. Swanton, “Explanation of the Seattle Totem Pole,” Journal of

American Folklore 11 (1905): 108–10; postcard from C. H. Ober to Myra H. Ober,

dated 10 January 1901, Postcard Collection, MSCUA; and Agnes Lockhart Hughes,

“Totem Poles,” Seattle Patriarch, 16 November 1907. For examples of urban impe-

rial identities from the European context, see Felix Driver and David Gilbert, eds.,

Imperial Cities: Landscape, Display, and Identity (Manchester: Manchester Univer-

sity Press, 1999).

23. This story has been recounted a number of times in various local books

and newspapers. See, e.g., E. G. Blaine, “The Famous Totem Pole of Seattle: How

It Was Procured, and the Fun It Caused,” Northwest Magazine 20, no. 6 (1902):

1–2; and Eleanor Shaw, “The Case of the ‘Stolen’ Totem,” Seattle P-I, 15 February

1974.

24. A.-Y.-P. News, 7 July 1906; “A.-Y.-P. Vividly Portrays the Redman,” Seattle

Times, 29 August 1909; “E. S. Curtis Here to Handle Exhibit,” Seattle Times, 28

May 1909; and “Five-Foot Board Hewn by an Indian to Be Exhibited,” Seattle P-I,

2 May 1909.

25. “Space Is Needed on Pay Streak,” Seattle P-I, 21 March 1909; “Eskimos

Come Out to Exhibit at 1909 Fair,” Seattle P-I, 19 September 1908; “Columbia,

Eskimo Belle, Will Hold Receptions,” Seattle Times, 29 August 1909; “Eskimo

Colony for the AYP to Catch Fish in Hood Canal All Winter,” Seattle Times, 4 Octo-

ber 1908; “Shows Stages of Indians’ Progress,” Seattle P-I, 24 August 1909; and

“Two Performers with Cheyenne Bill’s Show,” Seattle Times, 14 July 1909. For the

racial and imperial narratives of world’s fairs, see Robert W. Rydell, All the World’s

a Fair: Visions of Empire at American International Expositions, 1876–1916 (Chicago:

University of Chicago Press, 1984).

26. “Eskimo Deserts Reindeer at Fair,” Seattle Times, 13 June 1909; L. G.

Moses, Wild West Shows and the Images of American Indians (Albuquerque: Univer-

sity of New Mexico Press, 1996); “Miss Columbia Wins Contest,” Seattle P-I, 19

August 1909; and “Three Famous Brothers in Alaska Indian Tribe,” Seattle Times,

10 October 1909.

27. “Neah Bay Indians Seek Whale Contract,” Seattle Times, 1 August 1909;

“Johns Challenges Taholah,” Seattle Times, 18 April 1909; “A.-Y.-P. Vividly Por-

trays the Redman,” Seattle Times, 29 August 1909; and Harmon, Indians in the

Making, 152.

28. Peter Murray, The Devil and Mr. Duncan (Victoria: Sono Nis Press, 1985);

Michael E. Jarboe, “Education in the New Metlakatla, Alaska Mission Settlement”

(Ph.D. diss., University of Washington, 1983); John A. Dunn and Arnold Booth,

2 7 6



“Tsimshian of Metlakatla, Alaska,” in Suttles, ed., Handbook of North American

Indians, 294–97; Jean Usher, William Duncan of Metlakatla: A Victorian Missionary

in British Columbia (Ottawa: National Museum of Canada, 1974); “Alaska Women

Prepare Exhibit,” Seattle P-I, 13 May 1909; “Red Men’s Band to Play at Fair,” Seattle

P-I, 6 September 1909; and Jay Miller and Carol M. Eastman, The Tsimshian and

Their Neighbors of the North Pacific Coast (Seattle: University of Washington Press,

1984).

29. “Red Men Revel in Real Races,” Seattle Times, 7 September 1909; “Painted

Warriors at Fair,” Seattle Times, 16 July 1909; and “Sioux Greets Red Brother at

AYPE,” Seattle Star, 16 July 1909.

30. “Indian Life on Seattle Streets,” Seattle P-I, 10 December 1905; Nina

Alberta Arndt, “Seeing Seattle: The Metropolis of the Great Northwest,” Overland

Monthly, 2d ser., 52 (1908): 68; “Indians Returning from Hop Fields,” Seattle P-I, 1

October 1906; and Annual Report for 1906, 255, Department of Indian Affairs, BCA.

31. “Indian Life on Seattle Streets,” Seattle P-I, 10 December 1905.

32. “Indian Baskets, Rare Works of Art by Aborigines of Washington and

Alaska,” Seattle P-I, 22 July 1900; Robert C. Nesbit, “He Built Seattle”: A Biography

of Judge Thomas Burke (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1961), 407; and

Helen Elizabeth Vogt, Charlie Frye and His Times (Seattle: Peanut Butter Publish-

ing, 1997), 71. See also Ruth B. Phillips, Trading Identities: The Souvenir in Native

North American Art, 1700–1900 (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1998);

and Shepard Krech III and Barbara A. Hail, eds., Collecting Native America,

1870–1960 (Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1999).

33. Edward Sapir, Nootka Texts (Philadelphia: Linguistic Society of America,

1939); J. V. Powell, Quileute Dictionary (Moscow: University of Idaho, 1976); Tim-

othy Montler, “Saanich, North Straits Salish” (M.A. thesis, University of Victoria,

1968); David M. Grubb, A Practical Writing System and Short Dictionary of Kwak-

w’ala (Ottawa: National Museum of Canada, 1977); and Gillian L. Story, Tlingit

Verb Dictionary (Fairbanks: University of Alaska Native Language Center, 1973).

7 / The Changers, Changed

1. For an overview of the life of Seeathl, see Furtwangler, Answering Chief Seat-

tle. For a highly melodramatic account of his funeral, see C. M. Scammon, “Old

Seattle and His Tribe,” Overland Monthly 4, no. 4 (April 1870): 297–302.

2. “To Honor Memory of Old Chief Seattle,” Seattle Times, 25 August 1911;

“Service at Grave of Seattle Prove [sic] Most Enthusiastic,” Seattle Times, 27 August

1911; “Fund Started in Memory of Chief Seattle,” Seattle P-I, 26 January 1938; and

“Chief Seattle Memorial,” Seattle P-I, 25 May 1938.

N O T E S  T O  C H A P T E R  7  /  2 7 7



3. Edmond S. Meany, “At Chief Seattle’s Grave,” printed in University of Wash-

ington Daily for Junior Day, 12 May 1911, Chief Seattle pamphlet file, MSCUA.

4. Florence Reynolds, Chief Seattle: The Rugged Old Indian after Whom the

Metropolis of the Northwest Was Named (n.p., 1922), Chief Seattle pamphlet file,

MSCUA; T. M. Crepar, Legend of Seattle and Suquamish (Seattle: Grettner-Diers

Printing Co., 1928), Chief Seattle pamphlet file, MSCUA.

5. “Hyas Tyee Comes to Reign over Carnival Crowds of Seattle,” Seattle Times,

17 July 1912. 

6. “Potlatch President Greeting Hyas Tyee,” Seattle Times, 18 July 1912; “Hyas

Tyee Comes to Reign over Carnival Crowds of Seattle,” Seattle Times, 17 July 1912;

and “Riches and Glory of North Shown in Great Parade,” Seattle P-I, 18 July 1912.

7. Stephen V. Ward, Selling Places: The Marketing and Promotion of Towns and

Cities, 1850–2000 (London: Routledge, 1998), esp. 9–28; Potlatch brochure, 1912,

Edmond S. Meany Papers, box 20, folder 7, MSCUA.

8. Kathleen Mooney, “Social Distance and Exchange: The Coast Salish Case,”

Ethnology 15, no. 4 (1976): 323–46; Jay Miller, Lushootseed Culture, 27; Waterman,

Notes on the Ethnology of the Indians of Puget Sound, 76–78; and Shelton, Gram

Ruth Sehome Shelton, 1–5.

9. Douglas Cole and Ira Chaikin, An Iron Hand upon the People: The Law

against the Potlatch on the Northwest Coast (Toronto: Douglas and McIntyre, 1990);

Christopher Bracken, The Potlatch Papers: A Colonial Case History (Chicago: Uni-

versity of Chicago Press, 1997).

10. “Portland Heralded Golden Age of City,” Seattle Times, 19 July 1911; Potlatch

brochure, 1912; Puget Sound Traction, Light, and Power Company advertisement,

Seattle P-I, 20 July 1912; “Chinook Chorus High Honor to Tyee,” Seattle Times, 20

July 1912; “Liner Potlatch to be Launched Tomorrow,” Seattle Times, 17 July 1912;

“Tomorrow’s Potlatch Program,” Seattle Times, 16 July 1912; and “Tyee, Plain Citizen

Again, Regrets Swift Passing of His Reign,” Seattle Times, 21 July 1912.

11. Cheasty’s Haberdashery advertisement, Seattle P-I, 15 July 1912; “Tilikums

and Alaska Day Pageant,” Seattle Times, 17 July 1912; “War Canoe and Its Crew

Score Big Hit,” Seattle Times, 18 July 1912; and “Personnel of the Tilikums,” Seattle

Times, 21 July 1912.

12. “Ikht Tribe Wins Tilikums’ Fight for Membership,” Seattle P-I, 28 May

1913; postcard dated 27 March 1917, Postcard Collection, MSCUA. For other

groups whose rituals involved impersonating Native people, see Philip J. Deloria,

Playing Indian (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1998).

13. “Potlatch President Greeting Hyas Tyee,” Seattle Times, 18 July 1912; “Hyas

Tyee Comes to Reign over Carnival Crowds of Seattle,” Seattle Times, 17 July 1912;

and “Riches and Glory of North Shown in Great Parade,” Seattle P-I, 18 July 1912.

14. “I.W.W. Denounced by Head of Navy, Attack Soldiers and Sailors,” Seattle

Times, 18 July 1913; “Three Soldiers Assaulted by Mob, Saved by Police,” Seattle P-I,

2 7 8



18 July 1913; “Anarchy in Seattle Stamped Out When Sailors Get Busy,” Seattle Times,

19 July 1913; “1914 Potlatch Starts with Key Ceremony,” Seattle Times, 15 July 1914;

and “Tilikums, New, Old, to Discuss Potlatch Plans,” Seattle Times, 19 August 1934.

15. “Descendants of Pioneers Celebrate,” Seattle P-I, 13 November 1938.

16. Thomas Prosch, Chronological History, 214; “Roll of Pioneers,” Seattle

Times or P-I, undated clipping (but likely 1893), Clarence B. Bagley Scrapbooks,

vol. 1, 143, MSCUA.

17. Arthur Denny, Pioneer Days on Puget Sound, 3, 76–77; Denny narrative,

Bancroft Collection; and “The City’s Birthday,” Seattle P-I, 13 May 1893. 

18. Major J. Thomas Turner, “Reminiscences, 7 September 1914,” MOHAI

MS Collection, folder 106; Charles A. Kinnear, “Arrival of the George Kinnear

Family on Puget Sound, and Early Recollections by C. A. Kinnear, One of the Chil-

dren,” n.d., MOHAI MS Collection; and Redfield, Seattle Memories, frontispiece.

19. Henry’s poems can be found in Charles Prosch, Reminiscences, 126–28. 

20. “The Pioneers,” Seattle Patriarch, 7 June 1913; David M. Wrobel, Promised

Lands: Promotion, Memory, and the Creation of the American West (Lawrence: Uni-

versity Press of Kansas, 2002).

21. Emily Denny, Blazing the Way, 114–15, 141–42; Emily Inez Denny, “Chap-

ter 13—Miss Denny’s Chapter,” n.d., MOHAI MS Collection, folder 271.

22. Bass, Pigtail Days in Old Seattle, 46, 84; Bass, When Seattle Was a Village,

117–18; and Watt, Four Wagons West, 377.

23. Emily Denny, Blazing the Way, 381. This kind of analysis of local pioneer-

newcomer conflicts was first explored by Alexandra Harmon in Indians in the

Making, esp. 145–47.

24. For an overview of Meany’s life and work, see George A. Frykman, Seattle’s

Historian and Promoter: The Life of Edmond Stephen Meany (Pullman: Washington

State University Press, 1998). For examples of Meany’s documentation of local

Indians, see “The Last Lake Union Indians,” Seattle Times, 11 June 1898; and “The

Story of Seattle’s Nearest Indian Neighbors,” Seattle P-I, 29 October 1905. For

numerous examples of his participation in high school pageants, Potlatches, the

AYPE, and “Indian” naming, see Meany’s extensive correspondence files in his

collected papers at the University of Washington.

25. “Address by Judge C. H. Hanford on the occasion of unveiling historical

tablet at the foot of Cherry St., Seattle, November 13 1905,” MOHAI MS Collec-

tion, folder 298; Hanford, Seattle and Environs, 23. 

26. David Kellogg to Vivian Carkeek, ca. 1912, MOHAI MS Collection, folder

116; “75 Candles on Cake Will Tell Seattle’s Age,” Seattle P-I, 13 November 1926;

and David Kellogg, “The Making of a Medicine Man,” 20 May 1912, MOHAI MS

Collection, folder 116.

27. Abbie Denny-Lindsley, “When Seattle Was an Indian Camp Forty-five

Years Ago,” Seattle P-I, 15 April 1906; W. T. Dovell, “The Pathfinders,” Washington

N O T E S  T O  C H A P T E R  7  /  2 7 9



Historical Quarterly 1, no. 1 (1906): 47; and “Pioneers Honor City’s Founders at

West Seattle,” Seattle Times, 16 November 1938.

28. For discussion of these powerful cultural dynamics, see David M. Wrobel,

The End of American Exceptionalism: Frontier Anxiety from the Old West to the New

Deal (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 1993); and Michael Kammen, Mystic

Chords of Memory: The Transformation of Tradition in American Culture (New York:

Knopf, 1991).

29. “Indians in Canoes Beaten by Whites,” Seattle P-I, 22 July 1911; “Chief

Seattle to Be Honored,” Seattle Times, 12 November 1936; and “Pioneers Honor

City’s Founders at West Seattle,” Seattle Times, 16 November 1938. 

30. For examples of Native participation in Chief Seattle Days, see “To Honor

Memory of Old Chief Seattle,” Seattle Times, 25 August 1911; “Service at Grave 

of Chief Seattle Prove [sic] Most Enthusiastic,” Seattle Times, 27 August 1911; and

“Palefaces in Yearly Homage at Grave of Chief Seattle,” Seattle Times, 2 August

1935. For one example of alternative historical consciousness from the South—

the story of a slave rebellion—see James Sidbury, Ploughshares into Swords: Race,

Rebellion, and Identity in Gabriel’s Virginia, 1730–1810 (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-

versity Press, 1997). For speculations on the “intimate remembrances” of Seeathl

in local Indian communities, see Bierwert, “Remembering Chief Seattle.”

31. Shelton, Gram Ruth Sehome Shelton, 66.

32. Harriet Shelton Williams, “Indian Potlatch,” Seattle P-I, 10 August 1939.

8 / On the Cusp of Past and Future

1. Marian W. Smith, ed., Indians of the Urban Northwest (New York: Columbia

University Press, 1949), viii, 4.

2. Ibid., 6.

3. Richard C. Berner, Seattle, 1921–1940: From Boom to Bust (Seattle: Charles

Press, 1992); Rolf Knight, Indians at Work: An Informal History of Native Indian

Labour in British Columbia, 1858–1930 (Vancouver: New Star Books, 1978); and

Dauenhauer, Haa Kusteyí, Our Culture, 691–95.

4. Except where noted otherwise, data in this chapter come from the manu-

script of the fifteenth census of the United States, NARA.

5. Lynn Moen, ed., Voices of Ballard: Immigrant Stories from the Vanishing Gen-

eration(Seattle: Nordic Heritage Museum, 2001), 163–65, 174–79.

6. Richard Hugo, The Real West Marginal Way: A Poet’s Autobiography, ed. Rip-

ley S. Hugo, Lois M. Welch, and James Welch (New York: W. W. Norton, 1986), 8,

11; and Donald Francis Roy, “Hooverville: A Study of a Community of Homeless

Men in Seattle” (M.A. thesis, University of Washington, 1935), 12, 25, 83.

2 8 0



7. Polk’s Seattle (Washington) City Directory, vol. 44 (Seattle: R. L. Polk and Co.,

1930), 823; Colson, Makah Indians, 168.

8. Interview with Diane Vendiola by Will Sarvis, 10 September 2001, Ana-

cortes Museum; Bob Santos, Humbows, Not Hot Dogs! Memoirs of a Savvy Asian

American Activist (Seattle: International Examiner Press, 2002), 35. For Seattle’s

Filipino history, see Dorothy Fujita-Rony, American Workers, Colonial Power: Philip-

pine Seattle and the Transpacific West, 1919–1941 (Berkeley and Los Angeles: Uni-

versity of California Press, 2003).

9. Totem poles and other forms of Northwest Coast art marking the approaches

to the city are described in James M. Rupp and Mary Randlett, Art in Seattle’s

Public Places: An Illustrated Guide (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1992),

162, 255. See also “City Totem Pole Gone to Happy Hunting Ground,” Seattle

Times, 2 May 1966. Numerous photographs of the Totem Pole Motel and other

examples of “Indian” roadside art on the Pacific Highway can be found in the col-

lection of the Museum of History and Industry. 

10. “On with the New,” Seattle Argus, 22 July 1939; Seattle Argus, 12 November

1938; “Heap Big Fuss; Use Store-Bought Paint on Totem Pole, Quit Talking, Say

Indians,” Seattle Daily Times, 21 July 1938; “At Long Last! Indians to Get Famed

Totem,” Seattle P-I, 9 December 1939; Aldona Jonaitis, “Totem Poles and the Indian

New Deal,” Canadian Journal of Native Studies 2 (1989): 237–52; and “Replica 

of Famous Old Landmark Arrives Safely from Alaska,” Seattle P-I, 18 April 

1940.

11. Bryden Turner, “105, and History Lives for Jimmy John,” Nanaimo (BC)

Times, 7 May 1981; Shirl Ramsay, “A Visit with Jimmy John: Master Carver,” Victo-

ria (BC) Daily Colonist, 1 July 1979; Reg Ashwell, “Captain Jack’s Inside House-

Posts,” Victoria (BC) Daily Colonist, 12 August 1974; Gregory Roberts, “A Crisp

Assessment of Fish and Chips,” Seattle P-I, 29 May 1998; and Hilary Stewart,

Looking at Totem Poles (Vancouver: Douglas and McIntyre, 1993), 117.

12. For the accounts of “old-timers,” see Ross Anderson, “Gritty Last Stand 

of ‘Old Seattle’: The 1930s,” Seattle Times, 29 July 2001. For one historian’s per-

spective on the 1930s, and an explanation of the nostalgia they engender, see Sale,

Seattle, Past to Present, 136–44.

13. John Dos Passos, The 42nd Parallel (New York: Harper and Brothers Pub-

lishers, 1930), 75.

9 / Urban Renewal in Indian Territory

1. Richard Simmons, “Indians Invade Fort Lawton,” Seattle P-I, 9 March 1970;

“Army Disrupts Indian Claim on Fort Lawton,” Seattle P-I, 9 March 1970; and

N O T E S  T O  C H A P T E R  8  /  2 8 1



“Indian ‘Attack’ on Fort Lawton Fascinates World Press,” Seattle Times, 9 March

1970.

2. Richard C. Berner, Seattle Transformed: World War II to Cold War (Seattle:

Charles Press, 1999), 44–47. A 1947 poem protesting the plane’s name can be

found in John M. Rich, Chief Seattle’s Unanswered Challenge: Spoken on the Wild

Forest Threshold of the City That Bears His Name, 1854 (Seattle: Lowman and Han-

ford, 1947), 51–53. For the effects of wartime mobilization on the West more

broadly, see Gerald D. Nash, American West Transformed: The Impact of the Second

World War (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1990).

3. Lewis Kamb, “Adeline Skultka Garcia, 1923–2004: Activist Changed Life for

Urban Indians,” Seattle P-I, 28 February 2004. For discussions of Indians in the

Second World War, see Alison R. Bernstein, American Indians and World War II:

Toward a New Era in Indian Affairs (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press,

1991); Jere Bishop Franco, Crossing the Pond: The Native American Effort in World

War II (Denton: University of North Texas Press, 1999); and Kenneth William

Townsend, World War II and the American Indian (Albuquerque: University of

New Mexico Press, 2000).

4. Bahr, Chadwick, and Stauss, “Discrimination against Urban Indians in

Seattle”; interview with Marilyn Bentz by Teresa BrownWolf Powers, n.d. (2000),

videotape, American Indian Studies Center Library, University of Washington. 

5. Morgan, Skid Road, 9; Cathy Duchamp, “The Urban Indian Experience,”

KUOW National Public Radio, 13 January 2004, transcripts at www.kuow.org; Skid

Road Study Committee, Report (Seattle: Council of Planning Affiliates, 1969), not

paginated.

6. Karen Tranberg Hansen, “American Indians and Work in Seattle: Associa-

tions, Ethnicity, and Class” (Ph.D. diss., University of Washington, 1979), 93–98;

interview with Adeline Garcia by Teresa BrownWolf Powers, 24 May 2000, video-

tape, American Indian Studies Center Library, University of Washington; inter-

view with Lillian Chapelle by Teresa BrownWolf Powers, n.d. (2000), videotape,

American Indian Studies Center Library, University of Washington.

7. “Indian Women’s Organization Grows,” Northwest Indian News, February

1959; Indian Center News, 21 February 1962.

8. Gail Paul, “Dream of Permanent Home Inspires Summer Activity at

‘Indian Center,’” Indian Center News, 8 September 1962; interview with Mary Jo

Butterfield by Teresa BrownWolf Powers, 11 May 2001, videotape, American

Indian Studies Center Library, University of Washington.

9. Indian Center News, March 1971; interview with Adeline Garcia; and inter-

view with Mary Jo Butterfield.

10. Ramona Bennett lecture, 6 December 2000, videotape, American Indian

Studies Center Library, University of Washington; “North American Indian

Benefit Ball,” Indian Center News, 7 April 1961; “Indian Center Picnic,” Indian

2 8 2



Center News, 16 September 1961; “Indians Perform for Audubon Society,” Indian

Center News, February 1967; and “Successful Seventh Annual Salmon Bake,”

Indian Center News, September 1967.

11. “Pearl Warren Discusses Urban Indian Problems before Senate Subcom-

mittee,” Indian Center News, January 1968; “National Indian Urban Consultation

Organizes in Seattle,” Indian Center News, February 1968; interview with Letoy

Eike by Teresa BrownWolf Powers, 29 August 2000, videotape, American Indian

Studies Center Library, University of Washington; Maxine Cushing Gray, “Buck-

Passing on Longhouse Led to Ft. Lawton Affair,” Seattle Argus, 13 March 1970; and

Rupp and Randlett, Art in Seattle’s Public Places, 161.

12. Santos, Humbows, Not Hot Dogs! 35, 56–60; and “A Brief History of the

United Indians of All Tribes Foundation,” Pamphlet Files, MSCUA.

13. See Paul Chaat Smith and Robert Warrior, Like a Hurricane: The Indian

Movement from Alcatraz to Wounded Knee (New York: New Press, 1996); Adam For-

tunate Eagle, Heart of the Rock: The Indian Invasion of Alcatraz (Norman: University

of Oklahoma Press, 2002); and Stephen E. Cornell, The Return of the Native: Amer-

ican Indian Political Resurgence (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988).

14. Don Hannula, “Indian Picket Line Remains at Ft. Lawton,” Seattle Times,

11 March 1970; Jerry Bergman, “Indians Begin 2nd Week of Picketing,” Seattle

Times, 17 March 1970; Richard Simmons, “MP’s Arrest 77 Indians at Lawton,”

Seattle P-I, 16 March 1970; Don Hannula, “Indians Again Try to Occupy Fort Law-

ton; 80 Detained,” Seattle Times, 2 April 1970; Don Hannula, “Message from Sky:

‘Fort, Give Up,’” Seattle Times, 19 March 1970; Derek Creisler, Princess of the Pow-

wow (Seattle: Running Colors Productions, 1987); and “United Indians of All

Tribes Use Invasion of Fort Lawton in Effort to Get Support for All-Indian Multi-

service and Educational Center,” Indian Center News, April 1970.

15. Bahr, Chadwick, and Stauss, “Discrimination against Urban Indians in

Seattle,” 6; Don Hannula, “Indian Picket Line Remains at Ft. Lawton,” Seattle

Times, 11 March 1970; “Indians Seek Immediate Use of 16 Ft. Lawton Buildings,”

Seattle Times, 14 March 1970; “Indians Want Nixon Powwow,” Seattle Times, 16

March 1970; “A Brief History of the United Indians of All Tribes Foundation,”

Pamphlet Files, MSCUA; “Seattle Human Rights Commission Says Claim of Indi-

ans Must Not Be Ignored,” Seattle Medium, 12 November 1970; “City, Indians

Agree on Lawton Lease Plan,” Seattle Times, 15 November 1971; Hilda Bryant, “A

Proud Day for the Indians—Big Cultural Arts Center Opens Here,” Seattle P-I, 12

May 1977; Brenda Dunn, “The Indian Arts Center That Nobody Thought Would

Happen,” Seattle Weekly, 18 May 1977; and interview with Arlene Red Elk by

Teresa BrownWolf Powers, 18 May 2000, videotape, American Indian Studies

Center Library, University of Washington. 

16. Guy Monthan and Doris Monthan, “Daybreak Star Center,” American

Indian Art 3, no. 3 (Summer 1978): 28–34.

N O T E S  T O  C H A P T E R  9  /  2 8 3



17. Santos, Humbows, Not Hot Dogs! 64–67; interview with Diane Vendiola 

by Will Sarvis, 10 September 2001, Anacortes Museum; interview with Marilyn

Bentz; and Indian Center News, March 1971. For similar tensions elsewhere, see

Smith and Warrior, Like a Hurricane; and Loretta Fowler, Shared Symbols, Contested

Meanings: Gros Ventre Culture and History, 1778–1984 (Ithaca: Cornell University

Press, 1987).

18. Lewis Kamb, “Adeline Skultka Garcia, 1923–2004: Activist Changed Life

for Urban Indians,” Seattle P-I, 28 February 2004; and Jacqueline R. Swanson,

“American Indian Women’s Service League: The Role of Indian and Alaska Native

Women in Establishing Seattle’s Contemporary Indian Community,” unpublished

research paper in author’s possession.

19. Diane Shamash, ed., In Public: Seattle, 1991 (Seattle: Seattle Arts Commis-

sion, 1991), 40.

20. Regina Hackett, “Heap of Birds’ ‘In Public’ Work Is Set Up,” Seattle P-I, 15

May 1991; Laurie Olin, Breath on the Mirror: Seattle’s Skid Road Community (n.p.,

1972), 33.

21. Frank J. Clancy, Doctor Come Quickly (Seattle: Superior Publishing, 1950),

108; Morgan, Skid Road, 9; Jeffrey Lewis Dann, “A Study of an Indian Tavern on

Skid Road” (M.A. thesis, University of Washington, 1967), 41, 44, 55; and inter-

view with Bill Regan by Coll Thrush and Dana Cox, 6 December 1998, Oral His-

tory Collection, Northwest Lesbian and Gay History Museum Project Archives,

Seattle. For other communities of Pioneer Square and Skid Road, see Paul De

Barros, Jackson Street After Hours: The Roots of Jazz in Seattle (Seattle: Sasquatch

Books, 1993); Don Paulson, with Roger Simpson, An Evening at the Garden of

Allah: A Gay Cabaret in Seattle (New York: Columbia University Press, 1996); and

Ron Chew, ed., Reflections of Seattle’s Chinese Americans: The First 100 Years (Seattle:

University of Washington Press, 1994).

22. Morgan, Skid Road, 9; Dann, “Study of an Indian Tavern,” 5, 24, 27, 36–

37, 43–66, 75–84, 129; Jackie Swanson, personal communication.

23. Morgan, Skid Road, 9; Dann, “Study of an Indian Tavern,” 5, 24, 27, 36–

37, 43–66, 75–84, 129; John Graham and Company, Pioneer Square Redevelopment

(Seattle: n.p., 1966); “Skid Road Shelter Program Quietly Ends,” Seattle Times, 

1 April 1976; and Olin, Breath on the Mirror, 14.

24. John Graham and Company, Pioneer Square Redevelopment. See also

Sohyun Park Lee, “From Redevelopment to Preservation: Downtown Planning in

Post-war Seattle” (Ph.D. diss., University of Washington, 2001).

25. “More Police Promised for Pioneer Square Area,” Seattle Times, 12 June

1969; James P. Spradley, You Owe Yourself a Drunk: An Ethnography of Urban

Nomads (Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1970), 142; John Graham and Company,

Pioneer Square Redevelopment; “Seattle’s Success Story Recycling Skid Row,”

Phoenix Gazette, 14 June 1978; and David Hamer, History in Urban Places: The

2 8 4



Historic Districts of the United States (Columbus: Ohio State University Press,

1998), 94.

26. The ordinances in question are nos. 98552, 98868, 102901, and 103655.

Joseph P. Churchill, “Skid Row in Transition” (M.A. thesis, University of Washing-

ton, 1976), 19–22; Skid Road Study Committee, Report; Skid Road Community

Council, Changes in Downtown Seattle: 1960–1974 (Seattle: Skid Road Community

Council, 1974), 1; and “Skid Road Shelter Program Quietly Ends,” Seattle Times, 

1 April 1976. For background on SRO hotels, see Charles Hoch and Robert A.

Slayton, New Homeless and Old: Community and the Skid Row Hotel (Philadelphia:

Temple University Press, 1989); and Paul Groth, Living Downtown: The History 

of Residential Hotels in the United States (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University 

of California Press, 1994). For the politics of Seattle’s downtown streets, see Timo-

thy A. Gibson, Securing the Spectacular City: The Politics of Revitalization and Home-

lessness in Downtown Seattle (Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2004).

27. Skid Road Study Committee, Report; Rupp and Randlett, Art in Seattle’s

Public Places, 5, 23, 296; and Nard Jones, Seattle (Garden City, NY: Doubleday,

1972), 266.

28. J. A. Correa, “The City,” Northwest Indian News, February/March 1972;

Olin, Breath on the Mirror, 28, 32; and Earle Thompson, “Injun Blues,” Seattle Real

Change, February 1999.

29. David Horsey, “Is It Really Art?” Seattle P-I, 28 July 1991; Ben Jacklet, “A

Hard Life: A Week in the Life of Some of Seattle’s Urban Indians,” Seattle Stranger,

9 October 1997.

30. Interview with Marilyn Bentz.

31. Cathy Duchamp, “The Urban Indian Experience,” KUOW National Public

Radio, 13 January 2004, transcripts at www.kuow.org.

32. “Equality in Seattle Is Indians’ Message,” Seattle P-I, 12 March 1970;

Brenda Dunn, “The Indian Arts Center That Nobody Thought Would Happen,”

Seattle Weekly, 18 May 1977; David A. Fahrenthold, “People’s Lodge Draws Foes,”

Seattle Times, 13 July 1998; and James Bush, “Edifice Complex,” Seattle Weekly, 29

January 1999, 15. 

33. Bernie Whitebear, “My Brother the Eagle Knows the Truth,” Seattle Times,

19 November 1998.

10 / The Returning Hosts

1. Alki Women’s Improvement Club, Centennial Revue program, Badcon Col-

lection, MOHAI; “Original City Charter Shown,” Seattle P-I, 13 November 1951;

“Alki Landing Reenacted; Throng to See M’Arthur,” Seattle P-I, 13 November 1951;

N O T E S  T O  C H A P T E R  1 0  /  2 8 5



and William Schulze, “Landing at Alki Reenacted, and ‘Capsule’ Buried,” Seattle 

P-I, 14 November 1951.

2. “Congratulates Seattle; Sounds Warning on Foreign Aggression,” Seattle 

P-I, 14 November 1951. Ted Best recalled the impact of the national broadcast in 

a 1955 issue of the West Seattle Commercial Club newsletter, Badcon Collection,

MOHAI. For connections between frontier mythology and Cold War ideology, see

Richard Slotkin, Gunfighter Nation: The Myth of the Frontier in Twentieth-Century

America (New York: Atheneum, 1992); and Richard Drinnon, Facing West: The

Metaphysics of Indian-Hating and Empire-Building (Minneapolis: University of Min-

nesota Press, 1980).

3. Dorothy Hart, “A Look Forward,” Seattle P-I, 11 November 1951.

4. Murray Morgan, Century 21: The Story of the Seattle World’s Fair, 1962 (Seat-

tle: Acme Press, 1963); Don Duncan, Meet Me at the Center (Seattle: Seattle Center

Foundation, 1992); and Official Guide Book: Seattle World’s Fair, 1962 (Seattle: Acme

Publications, 1962). See also John M. Findlay, Magic Lands: Western Cityscapes and

American Culture after 1940 (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California

Press, 1992).

5. Ernest Callenbach, Ecotopia: The Notebooks and Reports of William Weston

(Berkeley: Banyan Tree Books, 1975).

6. See Klingle, “Urban by Nature”; and Sale, Seattle, Past to Present.

7. For overviews of 1970s reworkings of the speech, see Bierwert, “Remem-

bering Chief Seattle”; and Furtwangler, Answering Chief Seattle.

8. Thomas Berry, The Dream of the Earth (San Francisco: Sierra Club Books,

1988), 173.

9. “Nine of Ten Netted: METRO Perturbed as Indians Block Salmon Spawn-

ing Run,” Seattle Times, 20 September 1963.

10. Interview with Gilbert King George, MIT; “A Brief History of the United

Indians of All Tribes Foundation,” Pamphlet Files, MSCUA; interview with Ber-

nice White by Coll Thrush and Warren King George, 25 June 2004, Green River

Project, MIT; and “Informing Our Fellow Citizens,” Indian Center News, 2 Novem-

ber 1965. 

11. For one example, see American Friends Service Committee, Uncommon

Controversy: Fishing Rights of Muckleshoot, Puyallup, and Nisqually Indians (Seattle:

University of Washington Press, 1972). The text of the 1987 church apology can be

found at the website of the Washington Association of Churches, www.thewac.org/

Apology%201987.htm.

12. Lee Moriwaki, “Indian Fishermen’s Worries Could Sink West Seattle

Marina Project,” Seattle Times, 20 August 1982; Brad O’Connor, “Sports-Fishing

Preserve Carved Out of Elliott Bay,” Seattle P-I, 2 October 1988; and “Protecting 

a Steelhead Run: Muckleshoots Set Fine Conservation Example,” Seattle Times, 

25 January 1989.

2 8 6



13. Richard Seven, “A Snarly Problem in Ship Canal,” Seattle Times, 8 October

1987; Peter Lewis, “Marina Plan Gets Its Permit, but Tribes Pledge Court Fight,”

Seattle Times, 25 July 1987; Robert T. Nelson, “Permit Is Reissued for Marina,” Seat-

tle Times, 17 March 1988; Steve Miletich, “Tribes Win Halt to Work on Magnolia

Bluff Marina,” Seattle P-I, 2 July 1988; and Gil Bailey, “Magnolia Marina Agree-

ment,” Seattle P-I, 10 November 1989. For the listing of local salmon runs under 

the Endangered Species Act, see Klingle, “Urban by Nature.” For the sea lion hunt,

see M. L. Lyke, “Tribe’s Sea Lion Hunt Adds to Saga,” Seattle P-I, 30 June 1997.

14. Lewis Kamb, “Boldt Ruling’s Effects Felt around the World,” Seattle P-I, 

12 February 2004; and Erik Lacitis, “We ‘Have No Culture Left,’” Seattle Times, 

17 July 1976.

15. Fred Brack, “Port Charged with ‘Razing’ Unique Site,” Seattle P-I, 13 July

1976; “Artifacts to Delay Port Plan 3 Years,” Seattle Times, 24 February 1977; Don

Page, “Diggin’ the Dirt along Duwamish,” Seattle P-I, 13 March 1977; and Erik

Lacitis, “No Single Culprit in Duwamish Probe,” Seattle Times, 28 July 1976.

16. Erik Lacitis, “We ‘Have No Culture Left,’” Seattle Times, 17 July 1976; Terry

Tafoya, “Minority Voices: Indian ‘Roots’ Uncovered on Duwamish,” Seattle P-I, 

26 February 1977; “Uncovering Seattle’s Hidden History,” Seattle P-I, 22 February

1977; and Pablo Lopez, “Archaeologists Dug Up Artifacts That Could Help

Duwamish Tribe,” Seattle P-I, 7 June 1986. 

17. Solveig Torvik, “A History at West Point,” Seattle P-I, 8 May 1994; Dee Nor-

ton, “Artifacts Found; Trade Center Work Suspended,” Seattle Times, 5 February

1998; Dee Norton, “Duwamish Complain of Snub over Artifacts,” Seattle Times, 

6 February 1998; Suky Hutton, “Construction Unearths Duwamish Remains,” On

Indian Land, Spring 1998; and Alex Tizon, “Work Resumes at World Trade Center

Site Where Bones Were Found,” Seattle Times, 25 February 1998.

18. Hector Castro and Mike Barber, “After Decades, Duwamish Tribe Wins

Federal Recognition,” Seattle P-I, 20 January 2001; Bernard McGhee, “Duwamish

Tribe Wins Recognition,” Seattle Times, 20 January 2001; Bureau of Indian

Affairs, “BIA Issues Final Determination on the Recognition of the Duwamish

Tribal Organization,” news release, 19 January 2001; Sara Jean Green, “Chief Seat-

tle’s Tribe Clings to Its Identity,” Seattle Times, 18 June 2001; and Susan Gilmore,

“Duwamish Denied Tribal Status,” Seattle Times, 29 September 2001.

19. Stuart Eskenazi, “Settling Seattle Again: Founding Families Pay Tribute 

to Duwamish Tribe’s Support,” Seattle Times, 14 November 2001.

20. Jerry Large, “Interpretation of History Depends on Perspective,” Seattle

Times, 18 November 2001; “Seattle Marks 150th Anniversary in Pouring Rain,” www

.komotv.com, 13 November 2001; Paul Shukovsky, “Ballard Locks’ Creation Left

Tribe High and Dry,” Seattle P-I, 24 November 2001; and D. Parvaz, “Duwamish

Share Lessons of the Water with Others: Canoe Paddle a Tribute to Harmony with

White Settlers,” Seattle P-I, 29 August 2002.

N O T E S  T O  C H A P T E R  1 0  /  2 8 7



21. Pioneer Association of the State of Washington, “A Petition to Support

Recognition of the Duwamish Indians as a Tribe,” 18 June 1988, reprinted at

www.historylink.org; Paul Shukovsky, “Tribal Fate in Hands of a Few Federal

Employees,” Seattle P-I, 24 November 2001; Stuart Eskenazi, “Reversal of Tribe’s

Status Blasted,” Seattle Times, 11 January 2002; Stuart Eskenazi, “Duwamish

Tribe’s Recognition Hangs on a Small Technicality,” Seattle Times, 5 March 2002;

Paul Shukovsky, “Religious Leaders Back Recognition for Duwamish Tribe,” Seat-

tle P-I, 14 March 2002; Paul Shukovsky, “Decision Is Death Knell for Duwamish,”

Seattle P-I, 11 May 2002; Stuart Eskenazi, “Duwamish Mull Next Move,” Seattle

Times, 14 May 2002; and Paul Shukovsky, “Duwamish Will Take Their Case for

Recognition to Congress,” Seattle P-I, 9 July 2002.

22. Sara Jean Green, “Chief Seattle’s Tribe Clings to Its Identity,” Seattle

Times, 18 June 2001. For additional discussion of the Duwamish case within the

broader context of “nonrecognized” indigenous peoples, see Bruce Granville

Miller, Invisible Indigenes: The Politics of Nonrecognition (Lincoln: University of

Nebraska Press, 2002), 94–97.

23. Seattle, Her Faults and Her Virtues (ca. 1925), quoted in Carlos A. Schwantes,

The Pacific Northwest: An Interpretive History (Lincoln: University of Nebraska

Press, 1996), 1.

24. Lynda V. Mapes, “Bones Unearthed; Reburial Carries Hefty Price,” Seattle

Times, 19 October 2002.

25. Peter H. Jackson, “The Love Song of J. Timothy Eyman,” Seattle Weekly, 

31 January 2002, 24; Sherman Alexie, “Rapid Transit,” Seattle Stranger, 14 Novem-

ber 2002, 17; Seattle Weekly, 28 May 2003; and “Life and Times of Seattle,” Seattle

Times, 16 November 2001.

26. Emmett Watson, Digressions of a Native Son (Seattle: Pacific Institute,

1982); Emmett Watson, My Life in Print (Seattle: Lesser Seattle Publishing, 1993);

and Fred Moody, Seattle and the Demons of Ambition (New York: St. Martin’s Press,

2003), 24, 91, 106, 252, 279.

27. Robert Ferrigno, “Kiss My Tan Line: How Californians Saved Seattle,”

www.slate.com, 1 November 1996; and Julia Sommerfeld, “Our Social Dis-Ease,”

Seattle Times magazine section, 13 February 2005.

28. Sara Jean Green, “Duwamish Site May Be Sacred, but It’s Slated for Devel-

opment,” Seattle Times, 4 September 2001; and Eric Mathison, “Hill Rich in Her-

itage Preserved,” Highline Times, 23 June 2004.

29. Lisa Stiffler, “Park Gives Little Salmon a Refuge,” Seattle P-I, 4 June 2001;

and Caitlin Cleary, “New Park Sprouts on Old Waste Site,” Seattle Times, 4 June

2001.

30. Daniel K. Richter, Facing East from Indian Country: A Native History of

Early America (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2001), 10.

31. Ibid.

2 8 8



An Atlas of Indigenous Seattle

1. Waterman, “Geographical Names,” 186.

2. Ibid., 178, 186.

3. For coverage of Harrington’s life and work, see the special issue of Anthro-

pological Linguistics (33, no. 4, Winter 1991) devoted to his legacy. Discussion of

Harrington’s time in Seattle and an index to the field notes used in this atlas can

found in Miles, Papers. For a rare example of Harrington’s opinions about Native

sophistication, see his brief laudatory comments on Chumash boat-making and

Pomo basketry in Travis Hudson, Janice Timbrook, and Melissa Rempe, eds.,

Tomol: Chumash Watercraft as Described in the Ethnographic Notes of John P. Har-

rington (Santa Barbara, CA: Ballena Press/Santa Barbara Museum of Natural 

History, 1978). 

4. Cadastral Survey Field Notes and Plats for Oregon and Washington (Denver:

U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land Management, 1982); Duwamish

et al. vs. United States, exhibit W-2; Erna Gunther, Ethnobotany of Western Washing-

ton: The Knowledge and Use of Indigenous Plants by Native Americans (Seattle: Uni-

versity of Washington Press, 1945).

5. Waterman, “Geographical Names,” 178.

6. The spelling of personal names in the atlas entries remains the same as 

in the bulk of this volume. 

7. References consulted in retranscribing and retranslating include Warren

Snyder, Southern Puget Sound Salish; George Gibbs, A Dictionary of the Niskwalli

Indian Language—Western Washington, Contributions to North American Ethnol-

ogy, vol. 1 (Washington: Department of the Interior, 1877); Bates, Hess, and Hilbert,

Lushootseed Dictionary; Nile Thompson, A Preliminary Dictionary of the Twana 

Language (Shelton, WA: Twana Language Project, Skokomish Indian Tribe, 1979);

Ballard, Mythology of Southern Puget Sound; and Aert H. Kuipers, “Salish Etymo-

logical Dictionary,” University of Montana Occasional Papers in Linguistics 16

(2002). 

8. The “mallard” reference can be found in Larson and Lewarch, Archaeology

of West Point, 1–14.

9. Marian Smith, Puyallup-Nisqually, 133.

10. See, e.g., Harvey Manning and Penny Manning, Walks and Hikes on the

Beaches around Puget Sound (Seattle: The Mountaineers, 1995).

11. Thompson, “Original Residents of Shilshole Bay,” 10.

12. Jay Wells, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, personal communication. 

13. Marian Smith, Puyallup-Nisqually, 69; Miller and Onat, Winds, Waterways,

and Weirs, 75–82.

14. Warren Snyder, Southern Puget Sound Salish, 131. 

N O T E S  T O  AT L A S  /  2 8 9



15. Emily Denny, Blazing the Way, 137–39; Gordon R. Newell, Westward to

Alki: The Story of David and Louisa Denny (Seattle: Superior Publishing Co., 1977),

83–84, 89–90.

16. For the full report of the excavation, see Larson and Lewarch, Archaeology

of West Point.

17. George Vancouver, A Voyage of Discovery to the North Pacific ocean, and

round the world; in which the coast of north-west America has been carefully examined

and accurately surveyed (London: J. Stockdale, 1801), 512–13.

18. For this genre of stories, see Ballard, Mythology of Southern Puget Sound.

19. Arthur Denny, Pioneer Days on Puget Sound, 17; Mary McWilliams, Seattle

Water Department History, 1854–1954 (Seattle: Dogwood Press, 1955), 4–6.

20. Bass, Pig-Tail Days in Old Seattle, 37; Emily Denny, Blazing the Way, 9.

21. Waterman, “Geographical Names,” 188.

22. Bass, Pig-Tail Days in Old Seattle, 152.

23. Marian Smith, Puyallup-Nisqually, 135.

24. Ibid., 59; Jay Miller, Lushootseed Culture, 11–12.

25. Marian Smith, “Petroglyph Complexes,” 315. 

26. Duwamish et al. vs. United States, 697.

27. See Sarah K. Campbell, The Duwamish No. 1 Site: A Lower Puget Sound

Shell Midden (Seattle: University of Washington Institute for Environmental Stud-

ies, Office of Public Archaeology, 1981); and The Duwamish No. 1 Site: 1986 Data

Recovery (Seattle: BOAS, 1987).

28. Marian Smith, Puyallup-Nisqually, 127; William W. Elmendorf, The Struc-

ture of Twana Culture (Pullman: Washington State University, 1960), 51.

29. “Duwamish Duck Marsh of Century Ago Has Developed into Seattle’s

‘Golden Shore,’” Seattle Business 33 (1949): 2.

30. Warren Snyder, Southern Puget Sound Salish, 131. 

31. Nile Robert Thompson and C. Dale Sproat, “The Use of Oral Literature 

to Provide Community Health Education on the Southern Northwest Coast,”

American Indian Culture and Research Journal 28, no. 3 (2004): 15–16.

32. Interview with Florence “Dosie” Starr Wynn, Alki/Transfer CSO Facilities

Project Traditional Cultural Properties, MIT.

33. Ballard, Mythology of Southern Puget Sound, 55–64. Detailed discussion of

the many versions of this epic can be found in Miller and Onat, Winds, Waterways,

and Weirs.

34. Ballard, Mythology of Southern Puget Sound, 64.

35. Ibid., 60.

36. Ibid., 121–22; interview with Ellen Bena Williams, Alki/Transfer CSO

Facilities Project Traditional Cultural Properties, MIT.

37. Marian Smith, Puyallup-Nisqually, 68.

38. Ibid., 57, 62.

2 9 0



39. Waterman, Puget Sound Geography, 19.

40. In his Notes on the Ethnology of the Indians of Puget Sound, Waterman

describes the process: “‘Indian red’ (ochre) . . . is dug from the ground, kneaded 

by the women into lumps, and baked. The lumps are then broken open and the

reddest portions picked out. These are pounded up as fine as flour, and mixed

with salmon eggs. . . . This combination gives a beautiful dull red, which seems 

to adhere to a surface almost as well as our commercial paints, though it has no

gloss” (47).

41. There was a Suquamish site with a similar name west of Gorst: sHábdoop

‘drying place’. 

42. Bass, Pig-Tail Days in Old Seattle, 152.

43. For discussion of the boulder, see Maria Dolan and Kathryn True, Nature

in the City: Seattle (Seattle: The Mountaineers Books, 2003), 243–44.

44. Marian Smith, Puyallup-Nisqually, 70; Hermann Haeberlin and Erna Gun-

ther, The Indians of Puget Sound (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1930), 75.

N O T E S  T O  AT L A S  /  2 9 1




























BIBLIOGRAPHY

Abbott, Carl. “Footprints and Pathways: The Urban Imprint on the Pacific

Northwest.” In Northwest Lands, Northwest Peoples: Readings in Environ-

mental History, edited by Dale D. Goble and Paul W. Hirt, 111–24. Seat-

tle: University of Washington Press, 1999.

Alaska: “Our Frontier Wonderland.” Seattle: Alaska Bureau, Seattle Chamber

of Commerce, 1915.

Alexie, Sherman. Indian Killer. New York: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1996.

American Friends Service Committee. Uncommon Controversy: Fishing

Rights of Muckleshoot, Puyallup, and Nisqually Indians. Seattle: University

of Washington Press, 1972.

American Indian Culture and Research Journal 22, no. 4 (1998), special issue

devoted to urban Indian issues and literatures.

Anderson, Eva Greenslit. Chief Seattle. Caldwell: Caxton Printers, 1943.

Armbruster, Kurt E. Orphan Road: The Railroad Comes to Seattle, 1853–1911.

Pullman: Washington State University Press, 1999.

Asher, Brad. Beyond the Reservation: Indians, Settlers, and the Law in Washing-

ton Territory, 1853–1889. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1999.

Atwood, A. Glimpses in Pioneer Life on Puget Sound. Seattle: Denny-Correll,

1903.

Bagley, Clarence B. “Chief Seattle and Angeline.” Washington Historical

Quarterly 22, no. 4 (1931): 243–75.

———. History of King County, Washington. Chicago: S. J. Clarke, 1929.

———. History of Seattle from the Earliest Settlement to the Present Time. 3

vols. Chicago: S. J. Clarke, 1916.

Bahr, Howard M., Bruce A. Chadwick, and Joseph H. Stauss. “Discrimina-

tion against Urban Indians in Seattle.” Indian Historian 5, no. 4 (1972):

4–11.

Baillargeon, Emily. “Seattle Now: A Letter.” New England Review 20, no. 2

(1999): 147–56.

Baist’s Real Estate Atlas of Surveys of Seattle, Wash. Philadelphia: Baist, 1905.

2 9 3



Ballard, Arthur C. Mythology of Southern Puget Sound. Seattle: University 

of Washington Press, 1929.

———. Some Tales of the Southern Puget Sound Salish. Seattle: University 

of Washington Press, 1927.

Barsh, Russel. “Puget Sound Indian Demography, 1900–1920: Migration

and Economic Integration.” Ethnohistory 43 (1996): 65–97.

Bass, Sophie Frye. Pigtail Days in Old Seattle. Portland, OR: Metropolitan

Press, 1937.

———. When Seattle Was a Village. Seattle: Lowman and Hanford, 1947.

Basso, Keith H. Wisdom Sits in Places: Landscape and Language among the

Western Apache. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1996.

Bates, Dawn, Thom Hess, and Vi Hilbert. Lushootseed Dictionary. Seattle:

University of Washington Press, 1994.

Bauxar, J. Joseph. “History of the Illinois Area.” In Handbook of North 

American Indians, edited by William C. Sturtevant, vol. 15, Northeast,

edited by Bruce G. Trigger, 594–601. Washington: Smithsonian Insti-

tution, 1978.

Beaton, Welford. The City That Made Itself: A Literary and Pictorial Record 

of the Building of Seattle. Seattle: Terminal Publishing Co., 1914.

Bergland, Renée. The National Uncanny: Indian Ghosts and American 

Subjects. Hanover, NH: University Press of New England, 2000.

Berkhofer, Robert F., Jr. The White Man’s Indian: Images of the American

Indian from Columbus to the Present. New York: Knopf, 1978.

Berner, Richard C. Seattle, 1900–1920: From Boomtown, Urban Turbulence, 

to Restoration. Seattle: Charles Press, 1991.

———. Seattle, 1921–1940: From Boom to Bust. Seattle: Charles Press, 1992.

———. Seattle Transformed: World War II to Cold War. Seattle: Charles Press,

1999.

Bernstein, Alison R. American Indians and World War II: Toward a New Era

in Indian Affairs. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1991.

Berry, Thomas. The Dream of the Earth. San Francisco: Sierra Club Books,

1988.

Bierwert, Crisca. Brushed by Cedar, Living by the River: Coast Salish Figures 

of Power. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1999.

———. “Remembering Chief Seattle: Reversing Cultural Studies of a Vanish-

ing American.” American Indian Quarterly 22, no. 3 (1998): 280–307.

Binns, Archie. Northwest Gateway: The Story of the Port of Seattle. Garden

City, NY: Doubleday, Doran, and Company, 1941.

Blaine, David, and Catherine Blaine. Memoirs of Puget Sound: Early Seattle,

2 9 4



1853–1856. Edited by Richard A. Seiber. Fairfield, WA: Ye Galleon Press,

1978.

Blaine, E. G. “The Famous Totem Pole of Seattle: How It Was Procured, 

and the Fun It Caused.” Northwest Magazine 20, no. 6 (1902): 1–2.

Blumin, Stuart M. “Explaining the New Metropolis: Perception, Depiction,

and Analysis in Mid–Nineteenth Century New York.” Journal of Urban

History 11, no. 1 (1984): 9–38.

Bolyai, John Zoltan. “The Seattle Diphtheria Epidemic of 1972–1973 and Its

Relationship to Diphtheria among North American Native Americans.”

M.P.H. thesis, University of Washington, 1974.

Boyd, Robert. The Coming of the Spirit of Pestilence: Introduced Infectious 

Diseases and Population Decline among Northwest Coast Indians, 1774–

1874. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1999.

Bracken, Christopher. The Potlatch Papers: A Colonial Case History. Chicago:

University of Chicago Press, 1997.

Brechin, Gray. Imperial San Francisco: Urban Power, Earthly Ruin. Berkeley

and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1999.

Brown, Kate. “Gridded Lives: Why Kazakhstan and Montana Are Nearly 

the Same Place.” American Historical Review 106, no. 1 (2001): 17–48.

Buchanan, Charles M. “The Rights of the Puget Sound Indians to Game

and Fish.” Washington Historical Quarterly 6, no. 2 (1916): 109–18.

Buerge, David M. Seattle in the 1880s. Edited by Stuart R. Grover. Seattle:

Historical Society of Seattle and King County, 1986.

Burch, Paul. “The Story of Licton Springs.” The Westerner 9, no. 4 (1908):

19, 34.

Burrows, Edwin G., and Mike Wallace. Gotham: A History of New York City

to 1898. New York: Oxford University Press, 1999.

Bussell, C. B. Tide Lands: Their Story. Seattle: n.p., 1906.

Cadastral Survey Field Notes and Plats for Oregon and Washington. Denver:

U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land Management, 1982.

Cady, Jack. Street: A Novel. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1994.

Callenbach, Ernest. Ecotopia: The Notebooks and Reports of William Weston.

Berkeley: Banyan Tree Books, 1975.

Callender, Charles. “Illinois.” In Handbook of North American Indians, edited

by William C. Sturtevant, vol. 15, Northeast, edited by Bruce G. Trigger,

673–80. Washington: Smithsonian Institution, 1978.

Campbell, Sarah K. The Duwamish No. 1 Site: A Lower Puget Sound Shell

Midden. Seattle: University of Washington Institute for Environmental

Studies, Office of Public Archaeology, 1981.

B I B L I O G R A P H Y  /  2 9 5



Carlson, Frank. “Chief Sealth.” M.A. thesis, University of Washington, 1903.

Carpenter, Cecelia Svinth. Fort Nisqually: A Documented History of Indian

and British Interaction. Tacoma, WA: Tahoma Research Services, 1986.

Carter, Paul. The Road to Botany Bay: An Exploration of Landscape and His-

tory. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987.

Chadwick, Bruce A., and Joseph H. Stauss. “The Assimilation of American

Indians into Urban Society: The Seattle Case.” Human Organization 34,

no. 4 (1975): 359–69.

Chadwick, Bruce A., Joseph Stauss, Howard M. Bahr, and Lowell K. Halver-

son. “Confrontation with the Law: The Case of the American Indians 

in Seattle.” Phylon 37, no. 2 (1976): 163–71.

Chambers, Andrew Jackson. Recollections. N.p., 1947. Copy available in 

Special Collections, University of Washington Libraries.

Chapman, Charles C. History of Knox County, Illinois. Chicago: Blakely,

Brown, and Marsh, Printers, 1878.

Chew, Ron, ed. Reflections of Seattle’s Chinese Americans: The First 100 Years.

Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1994.

Chittenden, Hiram M. “Sentiment versus Utility in the Treatment of

National Scenery.” Pacific Monthly 23 (January 1910): 29–38.

Churchill, Joseph P. “Skid Row in Transition.” M.A. thesis, University 

of Washington, 1976.

Clancy, Frank J. Doctor Come Quickly. Seattle: Superior Publishing, 1950.

Clayton, Daniel W. Islands of Truth: The Imperial Fashioning of Vancouver

Island. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 2000.

Cole, Douglas. Captured Heritage: The Scramble for Northwest Coast Artifacts.

Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1985.

Cole, Douglas, and Ira Chaikin. An Iron Hand upon the People: The Law

against the Potlatch on the Northwest Coast. Toronto: Douglas and 

McIntyre, 1990.

Collins, June M. “John Fornsby: The Personal Document of a Coast Salish

Indian.” In Indians of the Urban Northwest, edited by Marian W. Smith,

287–342. New York: Columbia University Press, 1949.

Colson, Elizabeth. The Makah Indians: A Study of an Indian Tribe in Modern

American Society. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1953.

Conant, Roger. Mercer’s Belles: The Journal of a Reporter. Seattle: University 

of Washington Press, 1960.

Cornell, Stephen E. The Return of the Native: American Indian Political Resur-

gence. New York: Oxford University Press, 1988.

Costello, J. A. The Siwash: Their Life, Legends, and Tales. Seattle: Calvert, 1895.

2 9 6



Cotterill, George F. Climax of a World Quest: The Story of Puget Sound, the

Modern Mediterranean of the Pacific. Seattle: Olympic Publishing Co., 1928.

Creisler, Derek. Princess of the Powwow. Seattle: Running Colors

Productions, 1987.

Cronon, William. Nature’s Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West. New York:

W. W. Norton, 1991.

Crowley, Walt. Rites of Passage: A Memoir of the Sixties in Seattle. Seattle: 

University of Washington Press, 1995.

Dann, Jeffrey Lewis. “A Study of an Indian Tavern on Skid Road.” M.A. 

thesis, University of Washington, 1967.

Danziger, Edmund. Survival and Regeneration: Detroit’s American Indian

Community. Detroit: Wayne State University, 1991.

Dauenhauer, Nora Marks. Haa Kusteyí, Our Culture: Tlingit Life Stories. 

Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1994.

Davis, James E. Frontier Illinois. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1998.

Davis, Rodney O. “The Frontier State, 1818–48.” In A Guide to the History 

of Illinois, edited by John Hoffman, 49–62. New York: Greenwood Press,

1991.

Dawson, Michael. Selling British Columbia: Tourism and Consumer Culture,

1890–1970. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 2004.

De Barros, Paul. Jackson Street After Hours: The Roots of Jazz in Seattle. 

Seattle: Sasquatch Books, 1993.

Deloria, Philip J. Playing Indian. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1998.

Dening, Greg. Islands and Beaches: Discourse on a Silent Land, Marquesas,

1774–1880. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1980.

Denny, Arthur Armstrong. Pioneer Days on Puget Sound. Seattle: C. B. Bagley,

Printer, 1888.

Denny, Emily Inez. Blazing the Way; or, True Stories, Songs, and Sketches of

Puget Sound and Other Pioneers. Seattle: Rainier Printing Co., 1909.

Deverell, William. “Plague in Los Angeles: Ethnicity and Typicality.” In Over

the Edge: Remapping the American West, edited by Valerie J. Matsumoto

and Blake Allmendinger, 172–200. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University

of California Press, 1999.

Dilworth, Leah. Imagining Indians in the Southwest: Persistent Visions of a

Primitive Past. Washington: Smithsonian Institution, 1996.

Dippie, Brian W. The Vanishing American: White Attitudes and U.S. Indian

Policy. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 1982.

Dolan, Maria, and Kathryn True. Nature in the City: Seattle. Seattle: The

Mountaineers Books, 2003.

B I B L I O G R A P H Y  /  2 9 7



Dorpat, Paul, and Genevieve McCoy. Building Washington: A History of

Washington State’s Public Works. Seattle: Tartu Publications, 1998.

Dos Passos, John. The 42nd Parallel. New York: Harper and Brothers Pub-

lishers, 1930.

Dovell, W. T. “The Pathfinders.” Washington Historical Quarterly 1, no. 1

(1906): 47–50.

Drinnon, Richard. Facing West: The Metaphysics of Indian-Hating and Empire-

Building. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1980.

Driver, Felix, and David Gilbert, eds. Imperial Cities: Landscape, Display, 

and Identity. Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1999.

Drucker, Philip. The Northern and Central Nootkan Tribes. Bureau of Amer-

ican Ethnology Bulletin 144. Washington: Smithsonian Institution, 1951.

Duncan, Don. Meet Me at the Center. Seattle: Seattle Center Foundation,

1992.

Duncan, Kate C. 1001 Curious Things: Ye Olde Curiosity Shop and Native

American Art. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2000.

Dunn, John A., and Arnold Booth. “Tsimshian of Metlakatla, Alaska.” In

Handbook of North American Indians, edited by William C. Sturtevant,

vol. 7, Northwest Coast, edited by Wayne M. Suttles, 294–97. Washington:

Smithsonian Institution, 1991.

Duwamish et al. vs. the United States of America, Consolidated Petition No. 

F-275. Seattle: Argus Press, 1993.

The Duwamish No. 1 Site: 1986 Data Recovery. Seattle: BOAS, 1987.

Eals, Clay, ed. West Side Story. Seattle: West Seattle Herald, 1987.

Eckrom, J. A. Remembered Drums: The Puget Sound Indian War. Walla Walla,

WA: Pioneer Press Books, 1989.

Egan, Timothy. The Good Rain: Across Time and Terrain in the Pacific North-

west. New York: Vintage Books, 1990.

Eliot, S. A. Report upon the Conditions and Needs of the Indians of the North-

west Coast. Washington: Government Printing Office, 1915.

Elmendorf, William W. The Structure of Twana Culture. Pullman: Washing-

ton State University, 1960.

Emmons, George Thornton, and Frederica de Laguna. The Tlingit Indians.

Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1991.

Faragher, John Mack, ed. Rereading Frederick Jackson Turner: The Significance

of the Frontier in American History and Other Essays. New York: H. Holt,

1994.

Ficken, Robert E. Unsettled Boundaries: Fraser Gold and the British-American

Northwest. Pullman: Washington State University Press, 2003.

2 9 8



Findlay, John M. Magic Lands: Western Cityscapes and American Culture after

1940. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1992.

Fixico, Donald L. The Urban Indian Experience in America. Albuquerque:

University of New Mexico Press, 2000.

Fortunate Eagle, Adam. Heart of the Rock: The Indian Invasion of Alcatraz.

Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 2002.

Foulkes, Colonel John W. “Jesus Will Save an Irishman.” In American Life

Histories: Manuscripts from the Federal Writers’ Project, 1936–1940. Wash-

ington: Library of Congress, 1998.

Fowler, Loretta. Shared Symbols, Contested Meanings: Gros Ventre Culture 

and History, 1778–1984. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1987.

Franco, Jere Bishop. Crossing the Pond: The Native American Effort in World

War II. Denton: University of North Texas Press, 1999.

Frykman, George A. Seattle’s Historian and Promoter: The Life of Edmond

Stephen Meany. Pullman: Washington State University Press, 1998.

Fujita-Rony, Dorothy. American Workers, Colonial Power: Philippine Seattle

and the Transpacific West, 1919–1941. Berkeley and Los Angeles: Univer-

sity of California Press, 2003.

Furtwangler, Albert. Answering Chief Seattle. Seattle: University of Washing-

ton Press, 1997.

Galois, Robert, with Jay Powell and Gloria Cranmer Webster. Kwakwaka’wakw

Settlements, 1750–1920: A Geographical Gazetteer. Vancouver: University

of British Columbia Press, 1994.

Garfield, Viola. Seattle’s Totem Poles. Bellevue, WA: Thistle Press, 1996.

Gedosch, Thomas F. “A Note on the Dogfish Oil Industry of Washington

Territory.” Pacific Northwest Quarterly 59, no. 2 (1968): 100–102.

Gibbs, George. A Dictionary of the Niskwalli Indian Language—Western

Washington. Contributions to North American Ethnology, vol. 1. Wash-

ington: Department of the Interior, 1877.

Gibson, Timothy A. Securing the Spectacular City: The Politics of Revitaliza-

tion and Homelessness in Downtown Seattle. Lanham, MD: Lexington

Books, 2004.

Goldschmidt, Walter R. Haa Aaní, Our Land: Tlingit and Haida Land Rights

and Use. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1998.

Gould, Stephen Jay. “The Creation Myths of Cooperstown.” In Bully for

Brontosaurus: Reflections in Natural History, by Stephen Jay Gould, 42–58.

New York: W. W. Norton, 1991.

Grant, Frederick James. History of Seattle, Washington. New York: American,

1891.

B I B L I O G R A P H Y  /  2 9 9



Groth, Paul. Living Downtown: The History of Residential Hotels in the United

States. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1994.

Grubb, David M. A Practical Writing System and Short Dictionary of Kwak-

w’ala. Ottawa: National Museum of Canada, 1977.

Gunther, Erna. Ethnobotany of Western Washington: The Knowledge and Use of

Indigenous Plants by Native Americans. Seattle: University of Washington

Press, 1945.

Haas, Lisbeth. Conquests and Historical Identities in California, 1769–1936.

Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1995.

Haeberlin, Hermann, and Erna Gunther. The Indians of Puget Sound.

Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1930.

Hamer, David. History in Urban Places: The Historic Districts of the United

States. Columbus: Ohio State University Press, 1998.

———. New Towns in the New World: Images and Perceptions of the

Nineteenth-Century Urban Frontier. New York: Columbia University

Press, 1990.

Hancock, Samuel. The Narrative of Samuel Hancock, 1845–1860. New York:

R. M. McBride and Co., 1927.

Hanford, Cornelius H., ed. Seattle and Environs: 1852–1924. Chicago: 

Pioneer Historical Publishing Co., 1924.

Hansen, Karen Tranberg. “American Indians and Work in Seattle: Asso-

ciations, Ethnicity, and Class.” Ph.D. diss., University of Washington,

1979.

Harmon, Alexandra. Indians in the Making: Ethnic Relations and Indian 

Identities around Puget Sound. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University 

of California Press, 1998.

Harrington, John Peabody. The Papers of John Peabody Harrington in the

Smithsonian Institution, 1907–1957. Edited by Elaine L. Miles. New York:

Kraus International Publications, 1981.

Harris, R. Cole. “How Did Colonialism Dispossess? Comments from an

Edge of Empire.” Annals of the Association of American Geographers 94,

no. 1 (2004): 165–82.

———. The Resettlement of British Columbia: Essays on Colonialism and Geo-

graphical Change. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 1997.

Hayden, Dolores. The Power of Place: Urban Landscapes as Public History.

Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995.

Heg, Mrs. E. E. “The Beginnings of Trinity Church, Seattle.” Seattle Church-

man 13, no. 2 (1900): 3–6.

Hilbert, Vi. “When Chief Seattle Spoke.” In A Time of Gathering: Native 

3 0 0



Heritage in Washington State, edited by Robin K. Wright, 259–66. Seattle:

University of Washington Press, 1991.

Hinckley, Ted C. The Americanization of Alaska, 1867–1897. Palo Alto, CA:

Pacific Books, 1972.

———. “The Inside Passage: A Popular Gilded Age Tour.” Pacific Northwest

Quarterly 56, no. 2 (1965): 67–74.

Hoch, Charles, and Robert A. Slayton. New Homeless and Old: Community

and the Skid Row Hotel. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1989.

Hoffman, John, ed. A Guide to the History of Illinois. New York: Greenwood

Press, 1991.

Holloway, Maria Aurora. “Illness Perception and Knowledge among Seattle

Urban Indians.” M.Nur. thesis, University of Washington, 1974.

Hudson, Travis, Janice Timbrook, and Melissa Rempe, eds. Tomol: Chumash

Watercraft as Described in the Ethnographic Notes of John P. Harrington.

Santa Barbara, CA: Ballena Press/Santa Barbara Museum of Natural

History, 1978.

Hugo, Richard. The Real West Marginal Way: A Poet’s Autobiography. Edited

by Ripley S. Hugo, Lois M. Welch, and James Welch. New York: W. W.

Norton, 1986.

Jackson, Deborah Davis. Our Elders Lived It: American Indian Identity in the

City. DeKalb: Northern Illinois University Press, 2002.

Jacobs, Orange. Memoirs of Orange Jacobs. Seattle: Lowman and Hanford,

1908.

Jarboe, Michael E. “Education in the New Metlakatla, Alaska Mission Settle-

ment.” Ph.D. diss., University of Washington, 1983.

John Graham and Company. Pioneer Square Redevelopment. Seattle: n.p.,

1966.

Jonaitis, Aldona. “Totem Poles and the Indian New Deal.” Canadian Journal

of Native Studies 2 (1989): 237–52.

Jones, Nard. Seattle. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1972.

Judson, Phoebe Goodell. A Pioneer’s Search for an Ideal Home: A Book 

of Personal Memoirs. Bellingham, WA: Union Printing, Binding, and 

Publishing Co., 1925.

Kaiser, Rudolf. “Chief Seattle’s Speech(es): American Origins and European

Reception.” In Recovering the Word: Essays on Native American Literature,

edited by Brian Swann and Arnold Krupat, 497–536. Berkeley and Los

Angeles: University of California Press, 1987.

Kammen, Michael. Mystic Chords of Memory: The Transformation of Tradition

in American Culture. New York: Knopf, 1991.

B I B L I O G R A P H Y  /  3 0 1



Kipling, Rudyard. From Sea to Sea and Other Sketches: Letters of Travel.

Garden City, NY: Doubleday, Page, and Co., 1925.

Kirk, Ruth. Tradition and Change on the Northwest Coast: The Makah, 

Nuu-chah-nulth, Southern Kwakiutl, and Nuxalk. Seattle: University 

of Washington Press, 1986.

Kittredge, William. The Nature of Generosity. New York: Alfred A. Knopf,

2000.

Klein, Kerwin Lee. Frontiers of Historical Imagination: Narrating the European

Conquest of Native America, 1890–1990. Berkeley and Los Angeles: Uni-

versity of California Press, 1997.

Klingle, Matthew W. “Urban by Nature: An Environmental History of

Seattle, 1880–1970.” Ph.D. diss., University of Washington, 2001.

Knight, Rolf. Indians at Work: An Informal History of Native Indian Labour 

in British Columbia, 1858–1930. Vancouver: New Star Books, 1978.

Krech, Shepard, III, and Barbara A. Hail, eds. Collecting Native America,

1870–1960. Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1999.

Krouse, S. A. “Kinship and Identity: Mixed Bloods in Urban Indian Com-

munities.” American Indian Culture and Research Journal 23, no. 2

(1999): 73–89.

Kruckeberg, Arthur. A Natural History of Puget Sound Country. Seattle: Uni-

versity of Washington Press, 1991.

Kuipers, Aert H. “Salish Etymological Dictionary.” University of Montana

Occasional Papers in Linguistics 16 (2002).

Laforet, Andrea, and Annie York. Spuzzum: Fraser Canyon Histories, 1808–

1939. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 1999.

Larson, Lynn L., and Dennis E. Lewarch, eds. The Archaeology of West Point,

Seattle, Washington: 4,000 Years of Hunter-Fisher-Gatherer Land Use in

Southern Puget Sound. Seattle: Larson Anthropological/Archaeological

Services, 1995.

Lee, Sohyun Park. “From Redevelopment to Preservation: Downtown 

Planning in Post-war Seattle.” Ph.D. diss., University of Washington,

2001.

Leighton, Caroline. Life at Puget Sound, with Sketches of Travel in Washington

Territory, British Columbia, Oregon, and California, 1865–1881. Boston: Lee

and Shepard, 1884.

Limerick, Patricia Nelson. The Legacy of Conquest: The Unbroken Past of the

American West. New York: Norton, 1987.

Lind, Carol. Western Gothic. Seattle: Lind, 1983.

Low, Denise. “Contemporary Reinventions of Chief Seattle: Variant Texts 

3 0 2



of Chief Seattle’s 1854 Speech.” American Indian Quarterly 19, no. 3

(1995): 407–22.

Lutz, John. “Inventing an Indian War: Canadian Indians and American 

Settlers in the Pacific West, 1854–1864.” Journal of the West 38, no. 3

(1998): 7–13.

———. “Work, Sex, and Death on the Great Thoroughfare: Annual Migra-

tions of ‘Canadian Indians’ to the American Pacific Northwest.” In 

Parallel Destinies: Canadian-American Relations West of the Rockies, edited

by John M. Findlay and Ken Coates, 80–103. Toronto: McGill-Queen’s

University Press, 2002.

Luxton, Norman Kenny. Tilikum: Luxton’s Pacific Crossing. Sidney, BC: Gray’s

Publishing, 1971.

Manning, Harvey, and Penny Manning. Walks and Hikes on the Beaches

around Puget Sound. Seattle: The Mountaineers, 1995.

Marino, Cesare. “History of Western Washington since 1846.” In Handbook

of North American Indians, edited by William C. Sturtevant, vol. 7, North-

west Coast, edited by Wayne M. Suttles, 169–79. Washington: Smithson-

ian Institution, 1991.

Marshall, Daniel P. “No Parallel: American Miner-Soldiers at War with the

Nlaka’pamux of the Canadian West.” In Parallel Destinies: Canadian-

American Relations West of the Rockies, edited by John M. Findlay and 

Ken S. Coates, 31–79. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2002.

McElroy, Colleen J. Traveling Music: Poems. Ashland, OR: Story Line Press,

1998.

McWilliams, Mary. Seattle Water Department History, 1854–1954. Seattle:

Dogwood Press, 1955.

Meany, Edmond S., ed. “Diary of Wilkes in the Northwest.” Washington 

Historical Quarterly 17 (1926): 137–56.

———, ed. Vancouver’s Discovery of Puget Sound. New York: Macmillan, 1907.

Miller, Bruce Granville. Invisible Indigenes: The Politics of Nonrecognition. 

Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2002.

Miller, Jay. Lushootseed Culture and the Shamanic Odyssey: An Anchored 

Radiance. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1999.

Miller, Jay, and Carol M. Eastman. The Tsimshian and Their Neighbors of the

North Pacific Coast. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1984.

Miller, Jay, and Astrida R. Blukis Onat. Winds, Waterways, and Weirs: 

Ethnographic Study of the Central Link Light Rail Corridor. Seattle: 

BOAS, 2004.

Milner, Clyde A., II, Carol A. O’Connor, and Martha Sandweiss, eds. The

B I B L I O G R A P H Y  /  3 0 3



Oxford History of the American West. New York: Oxford University Press,

1996.

Moehring, Eugene P. Urbanism and Empire in the Far West, 1840–1890.

Reno: University of Nevada Press, 2004.

Moen, Lynn, ed. Voices of Ballard: Immigrant Stories from the Vanishing 

Generation. Seattle: Nordic Heritage Museum, 2001.

Monthan, Guy, and Doris Monthan. “Daybreak Star Center.” American

Indian Art 3, no. 3 (Summer 1978): 28–34.

Montler, Timothy. “Saanich, North Straits Salish.” M.A. thesis, University

of Victoria, 1968.

Moody, Fred. Seattle and the Demons of Ambition. New York: St. Martin’s

Press, 2003.

Mooney, Kathleen. “Social Distance and Exchange: The Coast Salish Case.”

Ethnology 15, no. 4 (1976): 323–46.

Morgan, Murray. Century 21: The Story of the Seattle World’s Fair, 1962.

Seattle: Acme Press, 1963.

———. Skid Road: An Informal Portrait of Seattle. New York: Viking Press,

1951.

Morse, Kathryn. The Nature of Gold: An Environmental History of the Klondike

Gold Rush. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2003.

Moser, Charles. Reminiscences of the West Coast of Vancouver Island. Victoria:

Acme Press, 1926.

Moses, L. G. Wild West Shows and the Images of American Indians. Albuquer-

que: University of New Mexico Press, 1996.

Muir, John. Travels in Alaska. New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1915.

Murray, Peter. The Devil and Mr. Duncan. Victoria: Sono Nis Press, 1985.

Nash, Gerald D. American West Transformed: The Impact of the Second World

War. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1990.

Nelson, Charles M. “Prehistory of the Puget Sound Region.” In Handbook 

of North American Indians, edited by William C. Sturtevant, vol. 7, North-

west Coast, edited by Wayne Suttles, 481–84. Washington: Smithsonian

Institution, 1990.

Nesbit, Robert C. “He Built Seattle”: A Biography of Judge Thomas Burke.

Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1961. 

Newell, Gordon R. Westward to Alki: The Story of David and Louisa Denny.

Seattle: Superior Publishing Co., 1977.

Noel, Patricia Slettvet. Muckleshoot Indian History. Auburn, WA: Auburn

School District, 1980.

3 0 4



Nowell, Charles, and Clellan J. Ford. Smoke from Their Fires: The Life of a

Kwakiutl Chief. Hamden, CT: Archon Books, 1941.

O’Brien, Jean M. Dispossession by Degrees: Indian Land and Identity in Natick,

Massachusetts, 1650–1790. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.

Official Guide Book: Seattle World’s Fair, 1962. Seattle: Acme Publications,

1962.

Olin, Laurie. Breath on the Mirror: Seattle’s Skid Road Community. N.p., 1972.

One Hundred Views about Seattle, the Queen City. Seattle: R. A. Reid, 1911.

Paetze, Dick. Pioneers and Partnerships: A History of the Port of Seattle. Seattle:

Port of Seattle, 1995. 

Pascoe, Peggy. “Race, Gender, and the Privileges of Property: On the Sig-

nificance of Miscegenation Law in the U.S. West.” In Over the Edge:

Remapping the American West, edited by Valerie J. Matsumoto and Blake

Allmendinger, 215–30. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of Califor-

nia Press, 1999.

Paulson, Don, with Roger Simpson. An Evening at the Garden of Allah: 

A Gay Cabaret in Seattle. New York: Columbia University Press, 1996.

Perry, Adele. On the Edge of Empire: Gender, Race, and the Making of British

Columbia, 1849–1871. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2001.

Perry, Albert J. History of Knox County, Illinois: Its Cities, Towns, and People.

Chicago: S. J. Clarke Publishing Co., 1912.

Philbrick, Nathaniel. Sea of Glory: America’s Voyage of Discovery, the U.S.

Exploring Expedition, 1838–1842. New York: Viking, 2003.

Phillips, Ruth B. Trading Identities: The Souvenir in Native North American

Art, 1700–1900. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1998.

Polk’s Seattle (Washington) City Directory. Vol. 44. Seattle: R. L. Polk and Co.,

1930.

Porter, Frank W., III. “Without Reservation: Federal Indian Policy and the

Landless Tribes of Washington.” In State and Reservation: New Per-

spectives in Federal Indian Policy, edited by George Pierre Castile and

Robert L. Bee, 110–35. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1992.

Powell, J. V. Quileute Dictionary. Moscow: University of Idaho, 1976.

Prater, Yvonne. Snoqualmie Pass: From Indian Trail to Interstate. Seattle: 

The Mountaineers, 1981.

Prosch, Charles. Reminiscences of Washington Territory: Scenes, Incidents, 

and Reflections of the Pioneer Period on Puget Sound. Seattle: n.p., 1904.

Prosch, Thomas W. Chronological History of Seattle from 1850 to 1897. Seattle:

n.p., 1900.

B I B L I O G R A P H Y  /  3 0 5



Prosch, Thomas W., and C. T. Conover, comps. Washington, the Evergreen

State, and Seattle, Its Chief City. Seattle: T. F. Kane, 1894.

Raban, Jonathan. Hunting Mr. Heartbreak: A Discovery of America. New

York: Edward Burlingame Books, 1991.

Raibmon, Paige. Authentic Indians: Episodes of Encounter from the Late-

Nineteenth-Century Northwest Coast. Durham, NC: Duke University

Press, 2005.

Redfield, Edith Sanderson. Seattle Memories. Boston: Lothrop, Lee, and

Shepard Co., 1930.

Reps, John W. Panoramas of Promise: Pacific Northwest Towns and Cities in

Nineteenth-Century Lithographs. Pullman: Washington State University

Press, 1984.

Rhodes, Marjorie, ed. King County Censuses: 1870 U.S. Census and 1871 

Territorial Census for King County, Washington Territory. Seattle: Marjorie

Rhodes, 1993.

Rich, John M. Chief Seattle’s Unanswered Challenge: Spoken on the Wild Forest

Threshold of the City That Bears His Name, 1854. Seattle: Lowman and

Hanford, 1947.

Richardson, Judith. Possessions: The History and Uses of Haunting in the 

Hudson Valley. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2003.

Richter, Daniel K. Facing East from Indian Country: A Native History of Early

America. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2001.

Robbins, Tom. Still Life with Woodpecker. New York: Bantam Books, 1980.

Ronda, James P. “Coboway’s Tale: A Story of Power and Places along the

Columbia.” In Power and Place in the North American West, edited by

John M. Findlay and Richard White, 3–22. Seattle: University of Wash-

ington Press, 1999.

Rosen, Christine Meisner. The Limits of Power: Great Fires and the Process of

City Growth in America. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1986.

Rosenthal, Nicholas. “Repositioning Indianness: Native American Organi-

zations in Portland, Oregon, 1959–1975.” Pacific Historical Review 71, no.

3 (2002): 415–38.

Roy, Donald Francis. “Hooverville: A Study of a Community of Homeless

Men in Seattle.” M.A. thesis, University of Washington, 1935.

Rupp, James M., and Mary Randlett. Art in Seattle’s Public Places: An Illus-

trated Guide. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1992.

Rydell, Robert W. All the World’s a Fair: Visions of Empire at American Inter-

national Expositions, 1876–1916. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,

1984.

3 0 6



Sale, Roger. Seattle, Past to Present. Seattle: University of Washington Press,

1976.

Salmonson, Jessica Amanda. The Mysterious Doom and Other Ghostly Tales 

of the Pacific Northwest. Seattle: Sasquatch Books, 1992.

Sandercock, Leonie. Towards Cosmopolis: Planning for Multicultural Cities.

Chichester, U.K.: John Wiley and Sons, 1998.

Santos, Bob. Humbows, Not Hot Dogs! Memoirs of a Savvy Asian American

Activist. Seattle: International Examiner Press, 2002.

Sapir, Edward. Nootka Texts. Philadelphia: Linguistic Society of America,

1939.

Sato, Mike. The Price of Taming a River: The Decline of Puget Sound’s Duwamish/

Green Waterway. Seattle: The Mountaineers, 1997.

Sayre, J. Willis. This City of Ours. Seattle: Seattle School District, 1936.

Scammon, C. M. “Old Seattle and His Tribe.” Overland Monthly 4, no. 4

(April 1870): 297–302.

Schmitt, Jean-Claude. Ghosts in the Middle Ages: The Living and the Dead in

Medieval Society. Translated by Teresa Lavender Fagan. Chicago: Univer-

sity of Chicago Press, 1998.

Schwantes, Carlos A. The Pacific Northwest: An Interpretive History. Lincoln:

University of Nebraska Press, 1996.

Shah, Nayan. Contagious Divides: Epidemics and Race in San Francisco’s China-

town. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 2001.

Shamash, Diane, ed. In Public: Seattle, 1991. Seattle: Seattle Arts Commis-

sion, 1991.

Shelton, Ruth Sehome. Gram Ruth Sehome Shelton: The Wisdom of a Tulalip

Elder. Seattle: Lushootseed Press, 1995.

Shoemaker, Nancy. “Urban Indians and Ethnic Choices: American Indian

Organizations in Minneapolis, 1920–1950.” Western Historical Quarterly

19, no. 4 (1988): 431–47.

Sidbury, James. Ploughshares into Swords: Race, Rebellion, and Identity in

Gabriel’s Virginia, 1730–1810. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.

Simmons, Rose. “Old Angeline, the Princess of Seattle.” Overland Monthly

20 (November 1892): 506.

Skid Road Community Council. Changes in Downtown Seattle: 1960–1974.

Seattle: Skid Road Community Council, 1974.

Skid Road Study Committee. Report. Seattle: Council of Planning Affiliates,

1969.

Slotkin, Richard. Gunfighter Nation: The Myth of the Frontier in Twentieth-

Century America. New York: Atheneum, 1992.

B I B L I O G R A P H Y  /  3 0 7



Smith, Charles W. “Asa Shinn Mercer, Pioneer in Western Publicity.” Pacific

Northwest Quarterly 27 (1936): 352–67.

Smith, Henry Nash. Virgin Land: The American West as Symbol and Myth.

New York: Vintage Books, 1957.

Smith, Marian W., ed. Indians of the Urban Northwest. New York: Columbia

University Press, 1949. 

———. “Petroglyph Complexes in the History of the Columbia-Fraser

Region.” Southwest Journal of Anthropology 2, no. 3 (1946): 315–49.

———. The Puyallup-Nisqually. New York: Columbia University Press, 1940.

Smith, Paul Chaat, and Robert Warrior. Like a Hurricane: The Indian Move-

ment from Alcatraz to Wounded Knee. New York: New Press, 1996.

Snyder, Eugene E. Early Portland: Stump-Town Triumphant. Portland, OR:

Binfords and Mort, 1970.

Snyder, Warren. Southern Puget Sound Salish: Texts, Place Names, and Dictio-

nary. Sacramento: Sacramento Anthropological Society, 1968.

Sorkin, Alan L. The Urban American Indian. Lexington, MA: Lexington

Books, 1978.

Spiedel, William C. Sons of the Profits, or There’s No Business Like Grow Business:

The Seattle Story, 1851–1901. Seattle: Nettle Creek Publishing Co., 1967.

Spradley, James P. You Owe Yourself a Drunk: An Ethnography of Urban

Nomads. Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1970.

Stanbury, W. T. Success and Failure: Indians in Urban Society. Vancouver:

University of British Columbia Press, 1975.

Stewart, Hilary. Looking at Totem Poles. Vancouver: Douglas and McIntyre,

1993.

Story, Gillian L. Tlingit Verb Dictionary. Fairbanks: University of Alaska

Native Language Center, 1973.

Sugarman, Jonathan R., and David C. Grossman. “Trauma among Amer-

ican Indians in an Urban Community.” Public Health Reports 111, no. 4

(1996): 321–28.

Suttles, Wayne M. “The Early Diffusion of the Potato among the Coast 

Salish.” In Coast Salish Essays, by Wayne M. Suttles, 137–51. Seattle: 

University of Washington Press; Vancouver: Talonbooks, 1987.

———. “Northwest Coast Linguistic History—a View from the Coast.” 

In Coast Salish Essays, by Wayne M. Suttles, 265–81. Seattle: University

of Washington Press; Vancouver: Talonbooks, 1987.

———. “Persistence of Intervillage Ties among the Coast Salish.” In Coast

Salish Essays, by Wayne M. Suttles, 209–30. Seattle: University of Wash-

ington Press; Vancouver: Talonbooks, 1987.

3 0 8



Swanton, John R. “Explanation of the Seattle Totem Pole.” Journal of Amer-

ican Folklore 11 (1905): 108–10.

Sword, Robin D. “The ‘Saloon Crowd’ and the ‘Moral Darkness of Puget

Sound.’” Pacific Northwest Forum 4, no. 1 (1991): 95–101.

Thomas, Philip J. Songs of the Pacific Northwest. Saanichton, BC: Hancock

House, 1979.

Thompson, Nile. “The Original Residents of Shilshole Bay.” In Passport 

to Ballard: The Centennial Story, 10–16. Seattle: Ballard News Tribune,

1998.

———. A Preliminary Dictionary of the Twana Language. Shelton, WA:

Twana Language Project, Skokomish Indian Tribe, 1979.

Thompson, Nile, and Carolyn Marr. Crow’s Shells: Artistic Basketry of Puget

Sound. Seattle: Dushuyay Publications, 1983.

Thompson, Nile, and C. Dale Sproat. “The Use of Oral Literature to Provide

Community Health Education on the Southern Northwest Coast.” Amer-

ican Indian Culture and Research Journal 28, no. 3 (2004): 1–28.

Thomson, Reginald Heber, with Grant H. Redford. That Man Thomson.

Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1950.

Thornton, Russell, Gary D. Sandefur, and Harold G. Grasmick. The Urban-

ization of American Indians: A Critical Bibliography. Bloomington: Indi-

ana University Press, 1982.

Thornton, Thomas Fox. “Place and Being among the Tlingit.” Ph.D. diss.,

University of Washington, 1995.

Thrush, Coll-Peter. “Creation Stories: Rethinking the Founding of Seattle.”

In More Voices, New Stories: King County, Washington’s First 150 Years,

edited by Mary C. Wright, 34–49. Seattle: Pacific Northwest Historians

Guild, 2002.

Tolmie, William Fraser. The Journals of William Fraser Tolmie: Physician and

Fur Trader. Vancouver: Mitchell Press, 1963.

Townsend, Kenneth William. World War II and the American Indian. Albu-

querque: University of New Mexico Press, 2000.

Tuan, Yi-Fu. Space and Place: The Perspective of Experience. Minneapolis:

University of Minnesota Press, 1977.

Turbeville, Daniel E., III. “Cities of Kindling: Geographical Implications 

of the Urban Fire Hazard on the Pacific Northwest Coast Frontier, 1851–

1920.” Ph.D. diss., Simon Fraser University, 1986.

Tweddell, Colin E. “Historical and Ethnological Study of the Snohomish

Indian People.” In Coast Salish and Western Washington Indians, vol. 2,

475–694. New York: Garland Publishing, 1974.

B I B L I O G R A P H Y  /  3 0 9



Usher, Jean. William Duncan of Metlakatla: A Victorian Missionary in British

Columbia. Ottawa: National Museum of Canada, 1974.

Vancouver, George. A Voyage of Discovery to the North Pacific ocean, and round

the world; in which the coast of north-west America has been carefully exam-

ined and accurately surveyed. London: J. Stockdale, 1801.

Vogt, Helen Elizabeth. Charlie Frye and His Times. Seattle: Peanut Butter

Publishing, 1997.

Vouri, Mike. “Raiders from the North: The Northern Indians and Northwest

Washington in the 1850s.” Columbia 11, no. 3 (1997): 24–35.

Wade, Richard C. The Urban Frontier: The Rise of Western Cities, 1790–1830.

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1959.

Wandrey, Margaret. Four Bridges to Seattle: Old Ballard, 1853–1907. Seattle:

Wandrey, 1975.

Ward, Dillis B. “From Salem, Oregon, to Seattle, Washington, in 1859.”

Washington Historical Quarterly 6 (1915): 100–116.

Ward, Stephen V. Selling Places: The Marketing and Promotion of Towns and

Cities, 1850–2000. London: Routledge, 1998.

Warren, James R. The Day Seattle Burned. Seattle: J. R. Warren, 1989.

Waterman, Thomas Talbot. “The Geographical Names Used by the Indians

of the Pacific Coast.” Geographical Review 12 (1922): 175–94.

———. Notes on the Ethnology of the Indians of Puget Sound. New York: Heye

Foundation, 1973.

———. Puget Sound Geography. Edited by Vi Hilbert, Jay Miller, and Zalmai

Zahir. Seattle: Lushootseed Press, 2001.

Watson, Emmett. Digressions of a Native Son. Seattle: Pacific Institute, 1982.

———. My Life in Print. Seattle: Lesser Seattle Publishing, 1993.

Watt, Roberta Frye. Four Wagons West: The Story of Seattle. Portland, OR:

Metropolitan Press, 1931.

Weibel-Orlando, Joan. Indian Country, L.A.: Maintaining Ethnic Community

in Complex Society. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1991.

White, Richard. The Middle Ground: Indians, Empires, and Republics in the

Great Lakes Region, 1650–1815. New York: Cambridge University Press,

1991.

Whitney, Mason, ed. Magnolia: Memories and Milestones. Seattle: Magnolia

Community Club, 2000.

Wilkes, Charles. Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition during the

Years 1838, 1839, 1840, 1841, and 1842. 5 vols. New York: G. P. Putnam, 1844.

Williams, Larry E., Bruce A. Chadwick, and Howard M. Bahr. “Antecedents

3 1 0



of Self-Reported Arrest for Indian Americans in Seattle.” Phylon 40, 

no. 3 (1979): 243–52.

Wolf, Eric R. Europe and People without History. Berkeley and Los Angeles:

University of California Press, 1982.

Woods, Lawrence M. Asa Shinn Mercer: Western Promoter and

Newspaperman, 1839–1917. Spokane: Arthur H. Clark Co., 2003.

Wright, Robin K., ed. A Time of Gathering: Native Heritage in Washington

State. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1991.

Wrobel, David M. The End of American Exceptionalism: Frontier Anxiety from

the Old West to the New Deal. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 1993.

———. Promised Lands: Promotion, Memory, and the Creation of the Amer-

ican West. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2002.

Yesler, Henry L. “The Daughter of Old Chief Seattle.” Pacific Magazine 1,

no. 3 (1889): 25–27.

———. “Henry Yesler and the Founding of Seattle.” Pacific Northwest 

Quarterly 42 (1951): 271–76.

Newspapers

A.-Y.-P. News (Seattle)

Highline Times (Burien and Sea-Tac, WA)

Indian Center News (Seattle)

Nanaimo (BC) Times

New York Times

Northwest Indian News (Federal Way, WA)

Olympia Pioneer and Democrat

On Indian Land (Seattle)

Puget Sound Business Journal (Bellevue, WA)

Puget Sound Daily

Seattle Argus

Seattle Business

Seattle Daily Intelligencer

Seattle Daily Times

Seattle Medium

Seattle Patriarch

Seattle Post-Intelligencer (P-I)

Seattle Real Change

B I B L I O G R A P H Y  /  3 1 1



Seattle Star

Seattle Stranger

Seattle Times

Seattle Town Crier

Seattle Weekly

Seattle Weekly Gazette

Victoria (BC) Daily Colonist

Washington Standard (Olympia, WA)

Videotape Recordings

Bennett, Ramona. Lecture, 6 December 2000. American Indian Studies

Center Library, University of Washington.

Bullert, B. J. Alki: Birthplace of Seattle. Seattle: Southwest Seattle Historical

Society and KCTS Television, 1997.

Powers, Teresa BrownWolf. Interviews with members of the American

Indian Women’s Service League. American Indian Studies Center

Library, University of Washington.

Websites

Central Pacific Railroad Museum, cprr.org/Museum.

HistoryLink, www.historylink.org.

KOMO-4 Television, Seattle, www.komotv.com.

KUOW National Public Radio, Seattle, www.kuow.org.

Slate magazine, www.slate.com.

Washington Association of Churches, www.thewac.org.

Unpublished Manuscripts

Bancroft, Hubert Howe. Narratives of and interviews with early settlers, 

1878. Originals at Bancroft Library, Berkeley, California; uncataloged

microfilm copies at University of Washington, cited as Bancroft 

Collection.

Clah, Arthur Wellington. Diary, 1859–1909. National Archives of Canada,

Ottawa.

3 1 2



Sarvis, Will. Interview with Diane Vendiola, 10 September 2001. Anacortes

Museum.

Swanson, Jacqueline R. “American Indian Women’s Service League: The

Role of Indian and Alaska Native Women in Establishing Seattle’s Con-

temporary Indian Community.” Unpublished research paper in author’s

possession.

Waterman, Thomas Talbot. “Puget Sound Geography.” 1920. Photocopy 

of original at University of Washington.

Archival Collections

Army Corps Archives, Seattle. Duwamish-Puyallup Surveys.

British Columbia Archives (BCA), Victoria. Annual Reports, Department 

of Indian Affairs.

Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture, University of Washington.

Accession Records.

Manuscripts, Special Collections, and University Archives (MSCUA), Uni-

versity of Washington. Clarence B. Bagley Scrapbooks. Edmond S. Meany

Papers. Pamphlet Files. Postcard Collection. Thomas W. Prosch Papers.

Don Sherwood Collection. Kenneth G. Smith Papers.

Muckleshoot Indian Tribe Archives (MIT), Auburn, WA. Alki/Transfer CSO

Facilities Project Traditional Cultural Properties. Green River Project.

Museum of History and Industry (MOHAI), Seattle. Manuscript Collection.

Badcon Collection.

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA), Pacific Northwest

Region. Records of the Bureau of Indian Affairs, Western Washington

Agency. United States Census.

National Archives of Canada, Ottawa.

Northwest Lesbian and Gay History Museum Project Archives, Seattle. Oral

History Collection.

Oregon Historical Society, Portland. Scrapbooks.

Puget Sound Branch, Washington State Archives, Bellevue. King County

Death Records. King County Marriage Records. Real Property Assess-

ment and Tax Rolls.

Washington State Historical Society, Tacoma. Hilman F. Jones Papers.

B I B L I O G R A P H Y  /  3 1 3




























INDEX

Indigenous community affiliations of individuals are given where known; these affilia-

tions do not imply tribal enrollment or other legal status, nor does lack of listed affiliation

necessarily imply non-Indian status.

3 1 5

Admiral (neighborhood), 153

African Americans, 57, 98, 160,

169–71, 175

Alaska: Native migrants from, 71,

110–11, 156; raids by indigenous

people from, 107; tourist and other

journeys from Seattle to, 113, 115;

Seattle’s claims on, 114–15, 116–17,

134–35; economic connections to,

135, 152–53. See also specific indige-

nous peoples

Alaska-Yukon-Pacific Exposition

(AYPE), 92, 118; displays of Native

peoples and things at, 118–20;

Native participation in, 119–22

Alcatraz Island, 169–70

Alcohol, 48–49, 252; “bow and arrow

joints” (Indian taverns), 175, 

177

Alexie, Sherman (Spokane/Coeur

d’Alene), 9, 201

Alki John (Duwamish), 35

Alki Point. See Prairie Point

Alki Women’s Improvement Club, 19

Allen, George, 130

American Indian Movement, 169–70,

189

American Indian Women’s Service

League (AIWSL), 165–69, 170,

172–73, 185, 189

Angolook, Oliver (Iñupiat), 119

Anishinaabe/Chippewa (people), 

170

Aquino, Ella, 170

Arapaho (people), 119, 173–74

Archaeology (other than human

remains): artifacts uncovered 

by urban growth, 75, 96–97, 195–

96; as evidence of pre-contact

migrations, 107; and Duwamish

Tribe’s claims, 194. Also see the 

atlas

Arndt, Nina Alberta, 123

Asgood, Thomas, 72

Bagley, Alvin, and family, 73

Ballard, Arthur, 229

Ballard (neighborhood), 88, 91, 98,

100, 154

Ballast Island, 82–83, 85, 98, 105

Ballou, William, 48

Barry, Thomas, 72

Basketry Hat (Duwamish community),

194–95, 198, 205. See also Herring’s

House

Baskets, 122–24



Bass, Sophie Frye, 74, 141–43, 229

“Battle of Seattle” (1856), 49; descrip-

tion of, 46; place in civic mythology,

46, 55–56, 145–46; indigenous poli-

tics of, 52

Beacon Hill, 153

Beaton, Welford, 19

Behan, George, 72

Bell, William, 32, 36–37, 228

Belltown, 76

Bennett, Ramona (Puyallup), 168, 173

Benson, Hannah, 73

Bentz, Marilyn, 172, 181

Berry, Thomas, 188

Bezonoff, Mary (Tlingit), 156

Big Bug (Potlatch mascot), 132–33

Blackfoot (people), 156

Black Hawk War, 32

Black River, 85, 97, 201–2

Blaine, Catherine, 50, 58

Boeing Company, 153, 240

Boldt, George, 190, 193, 199

Bookelatqw (Duwamish), 234

Boren, Carson, 36–38

Boston (indigenous term for Ameri-

cans), 34

Bridges, Mary, 57

Bridges, Matthew, 57

British Columbia, 109, 110, 111; seen 

as origin of disease outbreaks, 60–

61; Indian migrants from, 71–73,

74, 120. See also specific indigenous

peoples

Brock, George, 27

Brown, Peter, 74

Buchanan, Charles M., 99–100

Buerge, David, 198

Bunty Charley (Duwamish), 44, 146

Burke, Carrie, 124

Burke, Thomas, 126

Butterfield, Mary Jo (Makah), 165,

167–68

Cady, Jack, 8–9

Callenbach, Ernest, 187

Capitol Hill, 153

Capsized (place), 21

Carkeek, Vivian, 146

Carpenter, James, 73

Carrasco, Joseph, 156

Carter, M. J., 96–97

Castro, Andrew, and family, 74

Cemeteries and burials, 35, 38, 88–

89; and epidemics, 62–63, 101;

disturbed by urban growth, 76, 101,

196, 200; authors’ and readers’

protocols regarding, 213

Century 21 Exposition, 186–87

Ceremonies, indigenous, 42–43, 44,

100

Chambers, Thomas, 27

Changer (indigenous concept): mythic

figure of Dookweebathl as, 24–25,

80; engineers and city planners as,

80, 93, 101

Chaoosh (shaman), 51

Chapelle, Lillian (Cowlitz/Yakama),

164

Charles, Alexis (Suquamish), 90

Charley (Duwamish), 44

Cheechako (Chinook Jargon for “new-

comer” or “greenhorn”), 124, 141,

144, 147

Cheethlooleetsa (Shilshoolabsh; also

known as Madeline), 88, 90–91

Cheney, William, 72

Cherokee (people), 157

Chesheeahud (Hachooabsh; also known

as Lake Union John, Chodups John,

John Cheshishon), 84, 91, 97, 118,

245; homestead of, 76–77, 90, 225;

burial, 88–89

Cheyenne (people), 119, 173–74

Chief-of-All-Women Pole (“Pioneer

Square Totem Pole”), 106, 133, 161;

3 1 6



theft and installation of, 113–15; and

tourism, 116–17; destruction and

replacement of, 158–59

Chief Seattle Club, 181

Chief Seattle Day, 126–27, 148–49

Chief Seattle Speech, 180, 182, 198,

227; as ghost story, 5–7; revival 

of, in 1970s, 187–88. See also

Seeathl

Chinatown, 155

Chinese (people), 47, 64–65, 75, 108,

165, 175

Chinook Jargon, 49; in place names,

30, 126, 203; use by Indians, 112,

148, 167; use by non-Indians, 36,

40, 43, 44, 49, 54, 64–65, 123; use

by Tilikums of Elttaes, 130, 133. See

also Cheechako

Chittenden, Hiram M., 95, 104

Choctaw (people), 153, 167

Christianity, 43, 73, 120–21, 188, 190

Christopher, John and Bridget, 73

Clah, Arthur Wellington (Tsimshian),

111

Class: as explanation for racial conflict,

50, 143–44; connected to “Indian

vices,” 61; relations between high-

class Duwamish and settler elite, 35,

42, 73; and effects of Great Fire, 81–

82; Indians as markers of white class

status, 124, 155. See also “Curios”;

Intermarriage/“miscegenation”;

“Squaw men”

Clayton, Daniel W., 22

Collins, Luther, 29, 49, 53

Collins, Patsy, 160–61

Columbia (Labrador Inuit woman),

119–20

Columbia City (neighborhood), 77

Colville (people), 157, 165

Commodities: Indians purchasing con-

sumer goods in Seattle, 44–45, 107,

108, 150; Indian food vendors, 70.

See also “Curios” 

Conklin, Ann (“Mother Damnable”),

47, 54

Conservation: effects of laws on indige-

nous peoples, 99–100, 189

Correa, J. A., 178

Cotterill, George, 19

Cowichan (people), 110

Cowlitz (people), 164

Crab John (Shilshoolabsh), 88

Crepar, T. M., 128

Cross, Alice (Duwamish), 233

Crow, Joseph, 61

Crown Hill (neighborhood), 154

“Curios” (Native objects sold as sou-

venirs), 115, 124, 160. See also

Baskets; Totem poles

Cultus Charley (Duwamish), 54

Cumming, Bill, 160–61

Curley (Duwamish; also known as Old

Duwampsh Curley), 29, 47, 52, 54,

229; as “father-in-law” of Henry

Yesler, 57

Curtis, Edward S., 118

Darling family, 153–54

Davis, Ed (Snoqualmie), 85

Davis, Harvey (Choctaw) and Nellie,

167, 172

Davis, Jennie John (Hachooabsh/

Suquamish), 84, 98, 210

Day/Night (art), 173–74, 179–80

Daybreak Star Cultural Center, 171–72,

174, 181, 182

Deeds, Jan, 200

Dening, Greg, 16

Denny, Arthur, 33, 35, 45, 47, 53, 55,

228; and decision to come to Puget

Sound, 27; finds site for Seattle,

36–38; advocates laws against race-

mixing, 59; writes memoirs, 138–39

I N D E X  /  3 1 7



Denny, David, 27, 35, 51, 55, 76, 225

Denny, Emily Inez, 141–42

Denny, Louisa Boren, 44, 51

Denny, Mary, 34

Denny Party: as Seattle’s creation story,

17–20; journey to Puget Sound,

27–30; arrival at Prairie Point, 29–

30; places of origin, 31–32; comme-

morations of, 137, 197; as “Johnny

and Janie-come-latelies,” 195

Denny, Rolland, 137, 142–43

Denny-Lindsley, Abbie, 146

Devin, William, 184

Dilling, George W., 126

Dillon, Ellen, 71

Discovery Park. See Fort Lawton

Doctor Jim (Shilshoolabsh), 76, 77

Dore, John, 147

Dos Passos, John, 161

Dovell, W. T., 146–47

Drummerhouse, Jennie and John, 74

Duncan, William, 121

Duwamish (neighborhood), 75, 85

Duwamish (people), xvii, 26, 149, 204;

and related communities, 23–24;

legal status, 55, 193–94, 196–97,

198–99; settlements along river 

in 1880s, 76; testimony regarding

destruction of longhouses, 84–

85; choices made by refugees,

85–86; new cultural authority of,

194–99; longhouse project, 199.

See also names of individual people

and communities; Hachooabsh;

Shilshoolabsh

Duwamish Reservation: 1866 petition

against, 54–55, 143; 2001 petition

for, 198

Duwamish River, 154–55, 189, 204;

indigenous landscape of, 28; and

early urban sprawl, 75–76; dredging

and straightening of, 94, 95, 97, 103

Dzakwoos (Hachooabsh/Snoqualmie;

also known as Indian Jim Zackuse),

77, 85, 224

Ecological restoration, 96–97, 204–5

Eels, Lucy (Muckleshoot), 98

Egan, Tim, 8

Eike, Letoy (Lakota), 169

Eliot, S. A., 89–90

Elliott Bay, 37, 191

Environmentalism: and “ecological

Indian” stereotype, 182, 187–88;

rise of, in Seattle, 184–185, 187. 

See also Conservation

Epidemics (other than smallpox), 26,

110; fear of, as justification for

exclusion of Indians from city,

60–63. See also Smallpox

Eskimo/Inuit, 119–20, 153

Eyman, Tim, 201

Fay, Robert, 28–29, 233

Ferrigno, Robert, 202–3

Filipinos (and “Indipinos”), 156–57,

164, 175

Fires: anxieties about Indians setting,

63–64; Great Fire of 1889, 64, 80–

82; razing of Herring’s House,

82–86

FitzHenry, Rebecca, 57

FitzPatrick, Elizabeth, 73

Flathead/Salish-Kootenai (people), 

121

Fonda, Jane, 170

Fort Lawton, 162–63, 170–71. See also

Daybreak Star Cultural Center

Foster, Betsy (Duwamish), 58, 70

Foster, Joe (elder), 58

Foster, Joe (younger), 87

Francis, Joseph, 71

Frederick & Nelson’s (department store),

123

3 1 8



Friends of Duwamish Riverbend Hill,

204

Fu, Ling, 64–65

Garcia, Adeline Skultka (Haida), 164,

165, 167, 173

Garfield, Viola, 159

Garrison, Jennie (“Indian Jennie”), 57

Garrison, John, 57

Gays and lesbians, 175, 181

Ghost stories: throughout Seattle, 4–

5; Chief Seattle Speech as, 5–8;

accounts of homeless Indians as,

8–9; at Licton Springs, 93

Gill, Hiram, 88–89

Gold rushes: Fraser River, 40, 48;

Klondike, 115, 132–33

Goleeaspee (Duwamish) and family, 

70

Gould, Stephen Jay, 18

Graham, Walter, 49

Great Depression, 152–53, 155, 160–61

Gregory, Dick, 170

Griffey, Frank, 155

Guillod, Harry, 110

Gunther, Erna, 166, 212

Guye, Eliza and Francis, 74

Hachooabsh (people), 23, 52

Haida (people), 153, 157, 182

Haida House (curio shop), 160

Hamblet, Alonzo and Mary, 76

Hancock, Samuel, 26

Hanford, Cornelius, 64–65, 145

Hansen, Cecile (Duwamish; formerly

Cecile Maxwell), 195, 196–97, 199

Hanson, Ole, 127

Harding, Jacob and Lucy, 74

Harper, Jennie (Suquamish), 148

Harrington, John Peabody, 100–101,

211–12, 218

Hart, Dorothy, 185

Hatlepoh, Ellen, 74

Hawaiians, 47, 71, 72

Hawley, Barry, 154

Hays, Katie, 72

Heap of Birds, Hachivi Edgar (Cheyenne-

Arapaho), 173–74, 179–80

Heg, Mrs. E. E., 73

Henry, Francis, 140

Henry, James, 157

Henry, Louie, 74

Here Come the Brides (television series),

56

Herring’s House (Duwamish commu-

nity), 23, 80, 82–86, 98, 148,

204–5

Hilderbidle, Lois, 73

Hill, George, 71

Hilton, Nellie, 72

Hobucket, Harry (Quileute), 120

Hoh (people), 120

Holt, James, 71

Homesteads, Indian, 77

Homelessness, 167, 174, 177. See also

Indians as urban metaphors

Hooverville, 155

Hops, 70–71, 106, 108, 111

Horsey, David, 179

Hovland, Estelle (Métis), 155

Hudson’s Bay Company, 26

Hughes, Agnes Lockhart, 117

Hugo, Richard, 154–55

Huntington, Charles, 58

Hwelchteed (Shilshoolabsh; also

known as Salmon Bay Charlie), 

76, 88, 90–91

Illahee (brothel), 40, 49, 59–60, 63

Illahee (“place” in Chinook Jargon), 41,

52, 57

Imbrication, as metaphor for indige-

nous experience of urban growth,

68–69, 75

I N D E X  /  3 1 9



“Indian _____” naming convention,

71–73

Indian Center, 167–68, 172

Indian policy: and landless Puget

Sound Indians, 89–90, 132; and

American Indian Women’s Service

League, 168–69, 173. See also

Duwamish (people); Labor

Indians as urban metaphors: home-

less Indians, 8–10; romantic 

“last” Indians and “noble sav-

ages,” 88, 91, 92, 127–28, 139–

42; markers of urban “disorder,”

60–64, 95–96; rather than as

urban actors, 92; as violent “sav-

ages,” 145–47; Skid Road Indians 

as self-aware symbols, 177, 178; as

central problem of Seattle history,

200–201; in critiques of urban

growth and/or Seattle culture, 139–

42, 201–3

Indian Seattle vs. indigenous Seattle,

98

Industrial Workers of the World, 136,

160

Intermarriage/“miscegenation”: anxi-

eties over, 57, 58; policies against,

58–59, 74; mixed-race relationships

in early Seattle, 59, 71–72, 74. See

also Class; “Squaw men”

Inuit. See Eskimo/Inuit

Jackson, Henry (“Scoop”), 171

Jacob, Julie (Suquamish), 98

Jacobs, Melville, 159

Jacobs, Orange, 81, 109

Jacobsen, Andrew, 91

Japanese (people), 118, 156

Jim, Charlie, Sr. (Hutsnuwu Tlingit),

110–11

John, Jimmy (Mowachat Nuu-chah-

nulth), 159–60

Kalaeetsa (Duwamish), 57

Kammen, Michael, 147

Kavanaugh, Bernice and Carl, 157

Kellogg, David, 41, 44, 146

Kelly, Jane Fenton, 48

Kelly, John and Mary (and daughter

Maria), 74

Kelly, Michael, 57

King George, Gilbert (Muckleshoot),

84, 189–90

Kikisebloo (Duwamish; also known as

Princess Angeline), 70; as domestic

laborer, 73, 87; death and funeral 

of, 86–87, 142; as celebrity and

“royalty,” 87; as marker of urban

disorder, 96

Kinnear, Charles, 67–68, 139

Kipling, Rudyard, 81

Knox County (Illinois), 31–32

Kittredge, William, 4

Kwakwaka’wakw (peoples), 132;

Kweeha, 109; Lekwiltok, 107–8

La Belle, Angeline, 157

Labor, Indian: in early Seattle, 36,

47–49; as challenge to federal

Indian policy, 53–54; in 1880 cen-

sus, 72–73; role in creation of

churches, 73; end of importance 

of, in 1880s, 85; in Puget Sound

agriculture, 108; effects of Great

Depression on, 152; during and

immediately after World War II,

164–65

Ladder, Bowhertta (Nuu-chah-nulth/

Makah), 154

Lake Union, 51, 94, 120, 169; urban

development around, 76, 97; indige-

nous people living at, 77, 88, 97 

Lake Washington, 52, 53, 76, 95, 100,

189

Lake Washington Ship Canal, 104; con-

3 2 0



struction of locks, 91; concept and

early attempts to build, 94; comple-

tion of, 95; and archaeology, 96–

97; fishery in, 191

Lakota (people), 119, 121, 169

Lava Beds (neighborhood), 60, 61, 

63, 110, 155; 1880 census of resi-

dents, 70–73; and Great Fire of

1889, 81–82

Lee, Lily and Lorn, 153

Lee, Minnie and Robert, and family, 153

Leighton, Caroline, 42, 43

Leschay (Nisqually; also known as

Leschi), 52, 54, 181, 248; “People’s

Republic of Leschi,” 170

Licton Springs, 92–93

Little-Bit-Straight Point (place), 54, 101

Little Canoe Channel (Hachooabsh

community), 23, 96

Little Crossing-Over Place (Duwamish

community), 14, 37–38, 42, 47, 48,

57, 98; persistence as name for

Seattle, 102–3

Low, John, 27–29, 32, 197

Low, Lydia, 32, 34, 197

Lowar, Julia, 71

Low Point (place), 21, 28

Lummi (people), 168

Lyacksun (people), 120

Lynching, 49

MacArthur, Douglas, 184–85

Major Hamilton (Muckleshoot/

Duwamish), 84, 235

Makah (people), 154, 157, 168, 189;

migrations to Seattle, 111, 156; 

as “curio” vendors, 12, 123

Mandt, Ron, 200

Mapel, Jacob and Samuel, and family,

29, 42

Marshall, Harry (Cherokee), 157

Martin, Dorothy, 157

Maynard, David (“Doc”), 37, 49, 51, 52,

53, 55

McCarthy, Nancy, 72

McElroy, Colleen, 16

Meany, Edmond S., 92, 126–27, 144

Mercer, Asa Shinn, 56–57, 58, 60

Mercer, Thomas, 94, 251

Mesatchie Jim, 49–50

Metcalf, Leon, 149

Métis (people), 155, 157

Metlakatla (indigenous community),

120–21

METRO, 189

Miller, Harold E., 189

Miller, W. W., 59

Milton, William, 71

Minks, Henrietta, 73

Mitchell, Mrs. Bertrand (Tsimshian), 121

Model Cities, 169

Moody, Fred, 202

Moore, Ruth, 197

Morgan, Murray, 17

Moses, Joseph (Duwamish), 97

Moses (Duwamish) and family, 70

Muckleshoot (people), xvii, 189–92,

196, 198, 200, 204

Muckleshoot Reservation, 53, 79, 86,

90, 98

Muir, John, 115

Murphy, Maggie, 72

Murphy, Mary, 71

Museums, 116, 124, 197

New York–Alki (settlement at Prairie

Point): founding, 22, 30–31; indige-

nous-white relations at, 34–36

New York City, 30–31

Nisqually John, 29

North Wind mythic site complex, 102,

203–4

Nowell, Charles (Kweeha Kwakwa-

ka’wakw), 109

I N D E X  /  3 2 1



Nuu-chah-nulth (peoples), 111–12, 122,

123, 154; Sheshaht, 109, 123; Chick-

leset, 110; Kyuquot, 110; Hesquiaht,

110; Ditidaht, 116; Ucluelet, 159;

Mowachat, 159–60

Old Alki John (Duwamish), 34

Olin, Laurie, 179

Olympia, Washington, 27–28, 33–34

Ooyathl (Duwamish/Suquamish), 35

Ordinance No. 5 (“Removal of Indians”

ordinance, 1865), 54

Paige, George, 52, 54

Pe-ka-nim (Hoh), 120

Peltier, Leonard (Anishinaabe), 170

Penelekuts (people), 120

Percival, Edward (Suquamish), 211, 228

Peter, Simon (Ucluelet Nuu-chah-

nulth), and family, 159–60

Peterson, Clara (Skagit) and Paul, and

family, 153

Peterson, Helen (Makah) and Karl, 154

Petrich, Jesse, 160–61

Phelps, George S., 47

Phillips, Billy (Sbeebayoo) and Ellen

(Duwamish), 89, 90–91, 235

Pickering, William, 56

Pinnell, John, 59, 63, 75

Pioneer Place Park, 14, 106, 114, 158,

174, 179–80. See also Chief-of-All-

Women Pole; Day/Night; Little

Crossing-Over Place

Pioneer Square (neighborhood), 155,

174; designation as National His-

toric District, 176; gentrification 

of, 177–80. See also Skid Road

Pioneers: creating narratives of urban

anxiety, 136–44; commemorated at

Founders Days, 144–45, 147, 184–

85; Native participation in comme-

moration of, 148

Place names, indigenous, 92, 144

Place of Clear Water (Suquamish com-

munity), 22, 126

Place of Scorched Bluff (place), 21

Place of the Fish Spear (Duwamish

community), 23, 98, 101

Playing Indian, 134, 143, 155

Pollard, William (Tsimshian), 121

Port of Seattle, 194–96

Portage Bay, 88

Portland, Oregon, 27, 33

Potlatch (indigenous tradition), 99,

109, 131–32, 202

Potlatch (urban festival), 130–31, 132–36;

Native participation in, 148, 149–50

Poverty Hill. See North Wind mythic

site complex

Powers, Annie, 72

Prichard, Richard, 72

Prosch, Charles, 58, 59

Prostitution, 49, 59–60, 72

Public art, 3, 14, 173–74

Puyallup (people), 35, 162, 168

Prairie Point (place): as site of Seattle’s

creation story, 17–20; in indigenous

geographical context, 21; renamed

Point Roberts, 25; considered by

Hudson’s Bay Company, 26;

renamed Alki, 30; Native encamp-

ments at, 99; Denny Party’s log

cabin at razed, 139; AIWSL salmon

bakes at, 168; in centennial and

sesquicentennial celebrations, 184,

197

Quedessa, Daniel (Makah), 111, 112

Quileute (people), 120

Quinault (people), 120

Quitsalitsa (Duwamish) and family, 70

Raban, Jonathan, 9

Railroad, 82

3 2 2



Ramos, Hazel (Blackfoot) and George,

and family, 155–56

Rasmussen, Anne Overacker (Duwa-

mish), 197–98

Rasmussen, James, 198, 202

Red Elk, Arlene, 171

Redfield, Edith, 47, 139–40

Reyes, Joyce, 173

Reyes, Lawney (Colville), 165, 171, 181–82

Reynolds, Florence, 128

Richardson, Judith, 7

Richter, Daniel, 206–7

Rids the Cold (place), 21

Riverside (neighborhood), 155

Robbins, Tim, 8

Rogers, William (Duwamish/

Suquamish), 211

Ronda, James, 15

Roy, Donald, 155

Russell, Alonzo, 42

Ryerson family, 76, 153

Sacred places, 28, 100, 102, 203–4.

Also see the atlas

Sally (Duwamish/Suquamish), 43, 52,

54

Salmon, 28, 49, 53, 67, 190–92, 204,

223. Also see the atlas

Salmon Bay, 62, 107–8, 153; indige-

nous people living at, 52, 76, 77, 

88, 91 

Salt Water (indigenous name for Puget

Sound), 22; Anglicized form

(Whulge), 26–27

Saneewa (Snoqualmie), 45

Santos, Bob, 157

Satiacum, Bob (Puyallup), 162

Scheurmann family, 76

Schmitt, Helen Peterson (Makah), 154

Schmitt, Jean-Claude, 6–7

Scott, Thomas, 71

Seattle, Anne (Muckleshoot), 98

Seattle, Chief. See Seeathl

Seattle (city): platted at Little Crossing-

Over Place, 37; naming of, 37–38;

complex geography and geology of,

38, 93; “village period” defined, 41;

perceptions of among early visitors,

40, 42; built by indigenous labor,

47–49; attempts to remove Indians

from, 51–53, 54, 62, 63; incorpora-

tion of, 54; beginning of urban

sprawl in 1870s, 75–78; growth in

1880s, 80–86; and Panic of 1893,

86; environmental transformations

of landscape, 93–95; development

of regional Indian hinterland, 107–

13, 116, 117; advertised with Indian

imagery, 114–15, 116–17, 130–31,

158–60; and Second World War,

163–65; and postwar urban renewal,

169, 173, 180; rise of multicultural

politics, 168–70; ecotopian turn 

of, 187

Seattle Arts Commission, 173

Seattle Historical Society, 146

Seattle Indian Heritage High School, 173

Seattle Liberation Front, 170

Seattle, Mandy, 91

Seattle, Mary Sam, 91

Seattle Spirit, 144, 197; and racial con-

flict, 145–47; and the Cold War,

184–85

Seeathl (Duwamish/Suquamish; also

known as Seattle and Sealth), 42–

43, 51, 54, 58, 201; and city-found-

ing process, 26, 28, 34; reactions to

naming of town after him, 37–38;

on the “Changers,” 80; death of,

126; grave of, 127, 148; synonymy

with city, 128–29; warplane named

after, 164; as environmentalist icon,

187–88. See also Chief Seattle Day;

Chief Seattle Speech

I N D E X  /  3 2 3



Seeayay (Puyallup), 35

Seetoowathl (Duwamish; also known

as Old Indian George), 79, 97, 103,

210, 236

Seward Park, 168

Shelton, Gram Ruth Sehome (Tulalip),

131

Shilshoolabsh or Shilshole (people),

76, 88, 98, 100; relationship to the

Duwamish, 23; and raids by north-

ern peoples, 107–8, 182–83, 221,

222

Simmons, Michael T., 51

Single resident occupancy (SRO)

hotels, 155, 156, 175

Siwash (“Indian” in Chinook Jargon;

also racist term), 34, 49, 157

Skagit (people), 153

Skhandoo (Chilkoot Tlingit shaman),

120

Skid Road (neighborhood), 14, 167,

190; descriptions of, 165; as “Indian

territory,” 174–76; discrimination

in, 177. See also Pioneer Square

S’Klallam (people), 105, 118, 157

Skokomish/Twana (people), 120

Smallpox (“Comes out all over”), 101,

110; and ecological imperialism,

24–25; urban anxieties over, 60–63.

See also Epidemics (other than

smallpox)

Smart, Lillian, 18

Smith, Henry A., 227

Smith, Marian Wesley, 102, 151

Smith’s Cove, 63, 97, 153

Smith Tower, 103

Sneatlum, Amelia (Suquamish), 112,

210

Snohomish (people), 81, 148, 150, 157

Snoqualmie (people), 45, 77, 85

Snoqualmie Pass, 45

Solomon, Ben (Duwamish), 43

Somers, Joe, 76

South Park (neighborhood), 153

Space Needle, 186, 195

Speidel, Bill, 177

Spencer, Ernest (Yakama), 157

Spirit Canoe (place), 100

“Squaw Men” (racist term for white

men living with or married to

Indian women), 61. See also Class;

Intermarriage/“miscegenation”

Standless, J. E. “Daddy.” See Ye Olde

Curiosity Shop

Stevens, Isaac Ingalls, 50–51, 52, 53

Stewart, Robert M. and Helen, 74

Stosach (Duwamish) and family, 70

Stoney (people), 153–54

Subsistence practices (indigenous):

central to pioneer life in Seattle,

48–49; destruction of by urban

development, 89, 97, 99–100; crim-

inalization by conservation laws,

99–100, 189. Also see the atlas

Suquamish (people), 158–59; indige-

nous geography of, 23–24; as hosts

of Chief Seattle Day, 126, 148–49;

legal status in city, 190, 196, 198,

200

Suquamish (Port Madison) Reserva-

tion, 86, 90, 126, 127, 148–49

Swan, John M., 47–48

Swanton, John R., 116

Swinomish (people), 156–57

Tafoya, Terry, 195

Taholah (Quinault leader), 120

Tecumseh, Sam (Duwamish/

Muckleshoot), 84–85, 240

Tecumseh (Duwamish), 47

Temple, Richard (Suquamish), 158–59

Terry, Charles C., 45, 54

Terry, Leander, 28–29

Thomas, Cecilia, 72

3 2 4



Thomas, Jimmy (Tlingit), 155

Thompson, Earle (Yakama), 179

Thomson, Reginald H., 95

Tideflats (place), 79, 103

Tight Bluff (place), 21

Tilikums of Elttaes, 133–35, 140–41, 144

Tleebooleetsa (Hachooabsh; also known

as Madeline), 88–89, 91

Tlingit (peoples), 155, 156, 157; Stikine,

107; Hutsnuwu, 110–11; Ganaxádi/

Tongass, 113, 118, 159; Chilkoot,

120; Hoonah, 120, 152–53; Taku,

120; Chilkat, 120, 129

Tollen family, 76

Tolmie, William, 26

Totem House Fish & Chips, 160

Totem poles, 115, 116, 134, 158, 159,

169. See also Chief-of-All-Women

Pole

Transportation, 200–201

Treaty of Point Elliott, 50–51, 89

Tsetseguis (Hachooabsh), 225

Tsimshian (people), 109, 111, 120–21,

157

Tsootsalptud (Duwamish), 234

Tucked Away Inside (Shilshoolabsh

community), 23, 77, 88, 91, 97,

107–8

Tulalip (people), 131, 198

Tulalip Reservation and Tribes, 51, 86,

119, 120

Turner, Franklin (Choctaw) and Ellen,

153

Turner, Frederick Jackson, 147

Turner, J. Thomas, 48, 139

Twin Tepees Lounge, 160

Uhlman, Wes, 177

Union Bay, 23, 76, 96

United Indians of All Tribes, 171, 181,

182, 185. See also Daybreak Star

Cultural Center

United States v. Washington. See Boldt,

George

University of Washington, 88, 127, 170,

184, 209, 211

Urban history: in opposition to Indian

history, 11–12

Valley-Lightener, Marian, 160–61

Van Asselt, Henry, and family, 29, 42

Vancouver, George, 22, 24, 227

Vendiola, Diane (Swinomish), 156–57,

171

Victoria, British Columbia, 60–61

Vietnam War, 56

Wahalchoo, Jacob (Suquamish), 20–21,

98, 158, 232–33

Warren, Pearl (Makah), 165, 169, 171

Waterman, Thomas Talbot, 92, 97, 98,

209–11, 213–14

Watson, Emmett, 202, 203

Watt, Roberta Frye, 140–42

Webster, Lawrence (Suquamish),

158–59

Weed, Gideon, 62

West Point (place), 85, 90, 107, 195–96

West Seattle: growth of, 83–84, 99,

100, 101

West Seattle Business Association, 19

West Seattle Charlie (Duwamish), 83,

86

West Seattle Land Improvement Com-

pany, 83

Whatcom, Betsy (Muckleshoot), 210

Whitebear, Bernie Reyes (Colville), 157,

169, 182

Whitney, Lizzie, 73

Whitworth, Mary, and family, 73

Whulshootseed (language), 24, 25, 

28, 68, 131; conventions of use in

this book, xvi, 215–26; use of, place

names in Seattle, 14, 26, 37, 92–93, 

I N D E X  /  3 2 5



Whulshootseed (language) (continued)

102–3, 127; use by settlers, 64–65,

220; at Potlatch festivals, 148, 149;

place-naming practices in, 214–18.

Also see the atlas

Wilbur, Ollie (Muckleshoot), 79, 103

Wilkes, Charles, 25–26, 35

William (Duwamish leader), 53

Williams, Art (Duwamish/Puyallup/

Muckleshoot), 99–100, 111

Williams, Bena (Muckleshoot), 243

Williams, Harriet Shelton

(Snohomish), 148, 150

Williams, Sam (Ditidaht), 116

Winthrop, Theodore, 220

Wirtz, Jacob and Mattie, 72

Woolene, Louise, 72

Woolley, Nellie (Haida) and John, 153

Wrobel, David, 141

Wynn, Florence “Dosie” Starr (Muckle-

shoot), 102, 203, 242

Yakama (people), 112, 157, 164, 179, 237

Ye Olde Curiosity Shop, 116, 159

Yesler, Henry, 37, 50, 51–52, 54, 138;

and sawmill 14, 47, 53, 81; as Indian

agent, 52

Yesler, Julia (Duwamish), 57

Young, Ralph (Hoonah Tlingit), 152–53

Youngblood, Minnie (Makah) and

John, 154

Youngstown (neighborhood), 155

3 2 6



WEYERHAEUSER ENVIRONMENTAL BOOKS

The Natural History of Puget Sound Country by Arthur R. Kruckeberg

Forest Dreams, Forest Nightmares: The Paradox of Old Growth in the Inland

West by Nancy Langston

Landscapes of Promise: The Oregon Story, 1800–1940 by William G. Robbins

The Dawn of Conservation Diplomacy: U.S.-Canadian Wildlife 

Protection Treaties in the Progressive Era by Kurkpatrick Dorsey

Irrigated Eden: The Making of an Agricultural Landscape in the American West

by Mark Fiege

Making Salmon: An Environmental History of the Northwest Fisheries Crisis

by Joseph E. Taylor III

George Perkins Marsh, Prophet of Conservation by David Lowenthal

Driven Wild: How the Fight against Automobiles Launched the Modern 

Wilderness Movement by Paul S. Sutter

The Rhine: An Eco-Biography, 1815–2000 by Mark Cioc

Where Land and Water Meet: A Western Landscape Transformed 

by Nancy Langston

The Nature of Gold: An Environmental History of the Alaska/Yukon Gold Rush

by Kathryn Morse

Faith in Nature: Environmentalism as Religious Quest by Thomas R. Dunlap

Landscapes of Conflict: The Oregon Story, 1940–2000 by William G. Robbins

The Lost Wolves of Japan by Brett L. Walker

Wilderness Forever: Howard Zahniser and the Path to the Wilderness Act 

by Mark Harvey

On the Road Again: Montana’s Changing Landscape by William Wyckoff

Public Power, Private Dams: The Hells Canyon High Dam Controversy 

by Karl Boyd Brooks

Windshield Wilderness: Cars, Roads, and Nature in Washington’s National Parks

by David Louter

Native Seattle: Histories from the Crossing-Over Place by Coll Thrush

The Country in the City: The Greening of the San Francisco Bay Area

by Richard A. Walker



Drawing Lines in the Forest: Creating Wilderness Areas in the Pacific Northwest

by Kevin R. Marsh

Plowed Under: Agriculture and Environment in the Palouse 

by Andrew P. Duffin

Making Mountains: New York City and the Catskills by David Stradling

The Fishermen’s Frontier: People and Salmon in Southeast Alaska

by David F. Arnold

Shaping the Shoreline: Fisheries and Tourism on the Monterey Coast

by Connie Y. Chiang

WEYERHAEUSER ENVIRONMENTAL CLASSICS

The Great Columbia Plain: A Historical Geography, 1805–1910 

by D. W. Meinig

Mountain Gloom and Mountain Glory: The Development of the Aesthetics 

of the Infinite by Marjorie Hope Nicolson

Tutira: The Story of a New Zealand Sheep Station by Herbert Guthrie-Smith

A Symbol of Wilderness: Echo Park and the American Conservation Movement

by Mark Harvey

Man and Nature: Or, Physical Geography as Modified by Human Action 

by George Perkins Marsh; edited and annotated by David Lowenthal

Conservation in the Progressive Era: Classic Texts edited by David Stradling

CYCLE OF FIRE BY STEPHEN J .  PYNE

Fire: A Brief History

World Fire: The Culture of Fire on Earth

Vestal Fire: An Environmental History, Told through Fire, of Europe and

Europe’s Encounter with the World

Fire in America: A Cultural History of Wildland and Rural Fire

Burning Bush: A Fire History of Australia

The Ice: A Journey to Antarctica



Seeathl, photographed by E. M. Sammis in 1864, played a crucial role

in the founding of the sawmill town named for him, even if his death

in 1866 merited no mention in Puget Sound newspapers. uw na1511

This 1906 real estate brochure reflected dominant perceptions of the

relationship between cities and Indians in American history: the two

were considered mutually exclusive. uw mscua



This plan of the “Battle of Seattle” in January 1856, drawn by a naval officer

involved in the conflict, shows the lagoon where Little Crossing-Over Place once

stood. It also shows indigenous settlements in and around town, depicted with 

marks that look suspiciously like Plains-style tipis, as well as the “woods thronged

with Indians” on the slopes above the settlement. uw4101



These Native men, likely employees at Henry Yesler’s sawmill, were photographed

standing in front of Yesler’s cookhouse in 1866. Their labor, like that of many other

local indigenous people, made Seattle’s early survival possible. uw5870

Julia Yesler, daughter of Henry Yesler

and a Duwamish woman, represented

the “Seattle Illahee” of mixed-race

families, which both illustrated the

importance of Native people to town

life and caused consternation among

some white settlers. Photo courtesy of

Kathie Zellerberg.



This 1872 handbill warning of smallpox, the oldest extant piece of printed 

material from Seattle, does not directly mention Native people but nonetheless

exhibits the intense anxiety about urban disease outbreaks, for which Indians 

were often blamed. uw4095



This 1878 bird’s eye view of Seattle, created by a man named Glover, includes a tiny

flotilla of Native canoes and an Indian encampment, marked here with a black box. 

It does not, however, show the many other kinds of Native presence in and immediately

around Seattle. uw14531

When Native men and women provided a salmon feast for the 1883 Railroad Jubilee,

they may not have known the effect that the railroad and the immigration that followed

soon after would have on their lives. Photograph by Theodore Peiser. uw na1390



Kikisebloo (“Princess Angeline”), the daughter of Seeathl, is pictured here in 

1890 on the front porch of her home near the Seattle waterfront. Although she was

revered by many as “Indian royalty,” Kikisebloo was also mocked and maligned, 

and her “shanty” was seen by some as evidence that Seattle needed to “clean up” 

its urban landscape. uw na1521



Chesheeahud and Tleebooleetsa, also known as Lake Union John and

Madeline, were among the handful of Duwamish people who obtained

homesteads in and around Seattle in the late nineteenth century. Like

Kikisebloo, they were often portrayed as remnants of a “vanishing race.”

However, this photograph shows the persistence of some indigenous people

in traditional places as well as the continued connections between indige-

nous and pioneer families. Photograph by Orion Denny. uw na590



Indigenous dispossession in 3 acts

Act 1: In 1905, the home of Hwelchteed and Cheethlooleetsa stands on the shore-

line, across Salmon Bay from the Seattle suburb of Ballard, which supplanted

Hwelchteed’s ancestral community of Tucked Away Inside. Hwelchteed’s canoe 

is moored nearby. Photograph by Webster and Stevens. mohai 1983.10.9067

Act 2: Just a few years later, most likely in 1913, Hwelchteed is pictured during his

eviction. The three white men are unidentified but are almost certainly linked in

some way to the construction of Lake Washington Ship Canal, which required the

clearance of indigenous people and others whose homes were in the way of progress.

Photograph by C. Langstaff. Magnolia Historical Society Collection, uw Special

Collections

Act 3: Construction of the locks for the Lake Washington Ship Canal. Hwelchteed’s

home, where Cheethlooleetsa appears to have died sometime around the time of evic-

tion, stood just to the right of this view. By the time construction began, Hwelchteed

was living on the Port Madison (Suquamish) Reservation across Puget Sound.

Photograph by Webster and Stevens. mohai 2002.3.2022





The completion of the Lake Washington Ship Canal was the final straw for 

many indigenous people. When Lake Washington (in the background) dropped 

and became level with Lake Union ( foreground), the Black River, where many

Duwamish people continued to live, ceased to exist. uw sea1102

Seetoowathl, who lived in a floathouse on the Duwamish River just below the view

in the postcard on the facing page, was an important source of information about

indigenous geography in the Seattle area. He and his wife starved to death during

the winter of 1919-20.

The Seattle waterfront, including Ballast Island, was sometimes described as the

Venice of the Pacific because of the many Native canoes moored there. Some were

Duwamish; others belonged to people from far away. Photograph attributed to 

John P. Soule, 1891. uw na680





Encampments of Native migrants, like this one just south of the downtown business

district (but incorrectly labeled as Ballast Island), were common sights in Seattle

during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Photograph by Anders B.

Wilse. mohai 1990.45.14



This Native woman, photographed at an encampment near First Avenue and King

Street in 1898, is most likely Nuu-chah-nulth, from the west coast of Vancouver

Island. Journeys like hers, often taken annually, linked Seattle to Native communi-

ties as far away as southeast Alaska. Photograph by Oliver Phelps Anderson.

mohai shs 321



Just as Native people moved in Seattle’s “Indian hinterland,” so too did Native

imagery. The Chief-of-All-Women Pole, stolen from an Alaskan Tlingit community

in 1899, is shown here being erected in Pioneer Square as Seattle’s first official 

piece of public art. Photograph by Anders B. Wilse. mohai 1988.33.146



The Tilikums of Elttaes, shown here on parade during the Golden Potlatch of 1912,

enthusiastically adopted “savage” symbolism for their displays of civic boosterism,

illustrating the extent to which the “Indian hinterland” also transformed Seattle’s

urban vocabulary. uw313



Native vendors of “curios” were a common sight on Seattle streets, 

as this 1912 postcard shows, and sometimes even within the aisles of

department stores. Along with agricultural labor in the fields of western

Washington, such urban entrepreneurship became part of an annual

routine for many Northwest Coast families. mohai 2002.50.41.1



Taken in 1911, this photograph captures the interaction between a white woman 

and a Native basket vendor, most likely Makah or Nuu-chah-nulth. Photograph 

by Webster and Stevens. mohai 1983.10.7929



Baskets and other objects purchased from Native vendors often ended up in the 

curio corners of elite Seattle homes, as in this mill owner’s parlor. Photograph by

Anders B. Wilse. mohai 1988.33.60



The Alaska-Yukon-Pacific Exposition (aype) was Seattle’s “coming out 

party” and an articulation of the city’s urban identity. Not surprisingly, 

the million or so visitors to the fair encountered many kinds of Native 

imagery—and sometimes even real Indians. uw ayp462



Native people from Siberia and Labrador, like Native people from North 

America, the Philippines, and elsewhere, were displayed at the AYPE. While

typically portrayed in racist terms, many of these people came to the fair of their

own accord. Here, Frederick W. Seward, nephew of the more famous Seward

who purchased Alaska, gingerly holds a young Inuit boy named “Seattle” and 

is flanked by the “Eskimo Belle” Columbia and Seattle’s unidentified mother. 

uw ayp545



The “Big Bug,” official mascot of Seattle’s Potlatch festivals, drew on racist 

caricatures of Northwest Coast art, just as those who organized the Potlatches 

conducted “cannibalistic” ceremonies to initiate new members into their “tribe.” 

uw Ashford Collection 



While Potlatch organizers drew on totem poles and other northern imagery to create

an urban vocabulary, pioneers such as these photographed in 1905 by Theodore

Peiser at the Alki landing monument, crafted an entirely different kind of urban

narrative. Instead of using Indian imagery to advertise a bright future, pioneers

often used Indian imagery to lament a disappearing past. mohai Peiser 10088

Although they had little say in the creation of urban narratives, local Native com-

munities did participate in urban commemorations and told their own stories of

Seattle. Here, Suquamish tribal members perform at Chief Seattle Day festivities 

in 1912. uw na1950



In 1948, Ernest Bertelson took this photograph of several unidentified Native people

in the heart of Pioneer Square. As early as the 1930s, this neighborhood—the origi-

nal Skid Road—was already home to an urban Indian community. uw na1678

In the late 1950s, the American Indian Women’s Service League was created to 

help address the needs of Seattle’s urban Indians and to rehabilitate the public 

image of Native people. Members shown here in 1960 include Pearl Warren, 

Martha John, Leona Lyness, Hazel Duarte, Ella Aquino, and Dorothy Lombard.

Photograph by Harvey Davis. mohai pi 1986.5.30279



Inspired by the work of the Service League but informed by a new, more radical

approach to activism, Colville tribal member Bernie Whitebear was one of the 

leaders of the occupation of Fort Lawton by the United Indians of All Tribes in

1970. Photograph by Cary Tolman. mohai pi 1986.5.55140.1

The descendants of Seattle’s indigenous people—the Duwamish, the Suquamish,

and the Muckleshoot—began making public claims on the urban landscape in the

late twentieth century. Here, Muckleshoot tribal members march through South

Seattle to protest the criminalization of Indian fishing.  mohai pi 1986.5.4450




